EBOOK THREE

Tools to Manage the 
Ecosystem Processes



Copyright © Savory Institute 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other elec-
tronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other 
noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to the 
publisher, addressed ‘Attention: Permissions Coordinator,’ at the address below.

Savory Institute
885 Arapahoe Ave,
Boulder, Colorado 80302, USA
contact@savory.global
http://savory.global



Tools to Manage the 
Ecosystem Processes

Contents
INTRODUCTION 5
 
HUMAN CREATIVITY:  
KEY TO USING ALL TOOLS EFFECTIVELY	 6
 
MONEY AND LABOR:  
ONE OR BOTH IS ALWAYS REQUIRED 6
Mineral, paper, and solar dollars 7

TECHNOLOGY: FROM STONE-AGE SPEARS TO  
GENETIC ENGINEERING 8
Technology and the quick fix 8

FIRE: AN ANCIENT TOOL TIED TO  
ANCIENT BELIEFS 9
The impact of fire on biological communities	  10
The impact of fire on soil surfaces	 10
The impact of fire on plant communities	  10
The impact of fire on animals 11
The impact of fire on the atmosphere 11
 
REST: THE MOST MISUNDERSTOOD TOOL 12
Effects of rest in nonbrittle environments 12
Leaving it to nature 13
Effects of rest in brittle environments 13



Contents
LIVING ORGANISMS: BIOLOGICAL TOOLS  
FOR SOLVING CHALLENGES 16
Living organisms and community dynamics  16
Animal impact: Regenerating soils and shaping landscapes	  17

•	 Animal impact in brittle and nonbrittle environments 19
•	 What animal impact does 20
•	 Stock density and herd effect	 20

Grazing: Enhancing plant & animal health and productivity 23
•	 Grazing and overgrazing 24
•	 Impacts of overgrazing perennial grasses 26 
•	 Grazing and the brittleness scale  26

 
HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK	  28
GLOSSARY	  29



Introduction face. And at the nonbrittle end of the scale they 
can be used to prevent grassland communities 

The tools available for managing ecosystem advancing to forest.
processes fall into six broad categories (and two Engineers, sociologists, economists, environ-
sub-categories), as shown in the diagram below. mentalists, politicians, land managers, and others 
All tools—from stone-age spears to computers are beginning to reconsider the tools tradition-
and genetic engineering—fall under one or an- ally available to them. This is particularly true as 
other of the headings listed in the diagram. They they begin to work together with others outside 
include everything that gives humans the ability, their professions to solve the complex problems 
which most organisms lack, to significantly alter of today. This can be seen at the local level with 
our ecosystem in order to enhance or sustain our the expansion of watershed and collaborative 
lives. groups, and nationally and internationally at the 
Human creativity and money and labor lie out- policy level.
side the brackets because both are required in When managing holistically, tools are neither 
the use of the other tools. Living organisms in- good nor bad, and no judgments on the use of 
clude among them two new tools of such im- any tool or any action should be made outside 
portance that they are noted separately—animal the context of the whole under management. 
impact and grazing. In the Holistic Management You must consider your holistic context and the 
framework, there is a dotted line around the liv- degree of brittleness of the environment you are 
ing organisms tool and another around the eco- managing, along with a number of other factors 
system process of community dynamics. The before you can judge whether or not a particular 
dotted lines are a reminder that the tool and the tool is suitable or unsuitable in a given situation at 
process are one. Living organisms define a bio- a given time. The way a tool is used can make as 
logical community. You cannot change one with- much of a difference as whether its use is appro-
out changing the other in some way. priate. Over the next few sections, we will explore 
Of the tools between the brackets, technology the various tools inside the brackets—technolo-
is the primary tool used in urban or industrial gy, fire, rest, and living organisms (including graz-
businesses and professions, as well as by most ing and animal impact). We’ll return to these tools 
households. Few of these uses for technology in ebook #13 when analyzing comprehensive 
are explicitly intended for the purposes of mod- monitoring results. First however, let’s talk about 
ifying our ecosystem, though they often do. It is the tools outside the brackets—human creativity, 
important, even for individuals who are not man- money, and labor.
aging land to understand the impact their use of 
technology can have on ecosystem processes.

In any land management situation, fire, rest, and 
technology are the most commonly used tools for 
modifying our ecosystem. But often these tools 
cannot reverse the desertification occurring in 
many brittle environments. As you will see later, 
the two new tools of animal impact and grazing 
can help reverse the spread of deserts in envi-
ronments at the brittle end of the scale, which 
encompasses the majority of the earth’s land sur-

p.5



TOOLS TO MANAGE THE ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES

HUMAN LIVING ORGANISIMS
CREATIVITY TECHNOLOGY FIRE REST •	 ANIMAL IMPACT MONEY AND

•	 GRAZING LABOR

Human Creativity:  your holistic context—of using any available 
tool. This is not a task for a computer, or any 

Key to using all tools other technology, for that matter. Evaluating the 

effectively hopes, fears, and inter- and intrapersonal issues 
in any whole under management requires the 

An idea that enables one person to attain maxi- type of human creativity that no computer yet 
mum effect from his or her labor and money may developed can reproduce.
not work for another person, and in fact may not 
work for the same person under different cir- Holistic Management itself serves as merely a 
cumstances. A small family farm, for example, bit of ‘software’ to help you organize your think-
can be as unique as your fingerprint—not the ing and planning. Your ability to think creatively 
same as any other small farm any place else. as you incorporate its principles is what makes 

for successful application. Creativity is not sim-
However, unlike your fingerprint, which essen- ply a genetic endowment—it depends on your 
tially remains the same throughout your lifetime, mental, emotional, and physical health, your en-
that small farm changes continually: the people vironment, and most of all on how deeply you 
change, the economy within which they oper- desire the quality of life described in your holis-
ate changes, and the land itself changes. Thus, tic context. Human creativity is the key to using 
every situation requires management that must money, labor, and all the other management 
be an original product of human imagination and tools effectively. It is the only tool that can pro-
even that must evolve as the situation changes. duce the vision and goals you aspire to and that 

can be used to plan their achievement.
Human creativity is thus an essential and often 
minimally used element of our decision mak-
ing. Those managers who have a clear under- Money and Labor: One  
standing of the principles and practices of Ho-
listic Management have been highly creative in or both is always required
producing the results they want. That is why so At one point in time people supported them-
many of them are successful and being honored selves by applying creativity and labor directly 
for the work they do. They would be the first to to the raw resources of our ecosystem. Many 
tell you that they were not always that way— societies still do this as do many farm and ranch 
Holistic Management helped them learn to con- families not actually paying for the labor of fam-
sider all the tools at their disposal. ily members. Both then and now we used our 

creativity to obtain the maximum effect with as 
The Holistic Management ‘context checks’ (see little labor as possible.
ebook #5) were developed to help you assess 
the potential impacts—good or bad, relative to 

p.6



category, although they should not. Soils that are 
mined until exhausted or eroded away would be 
generating mineral dollars.

The second form of money, paper dollars, is de-
rived from human creativity and labor alone and 
consumes no other resources. All we have to do 
is apply our creativity in thousands of different 
ways to the many avenues open for investment: 
speculation in futures markets, stocks, bonds, 
corporate takeovers, and so on. On the other 
hand, various services—many of them essen-
tial—also fall into this category, including legal, 
accounting and security services. This form of 
money is backed by nothing deeper or more sol-

Because money and labor are often linked—e.g., id than the public’s confidence in the economy 
cash can be exchanged for labor—and because and/or the government and as a result its value 
neither can be used to influence our environment can fluctuate greatly due to changes in interest 
other than through another tool, Holistic Man- rates, stock prices, land values, inflation, and 
agement groups them together. Money is often currency exchange rates.
equated with wealth, and once upon a time that 
was true in that money was merely a token rep- Third, we can generate income from human cre-
resenting goods and services. But the develop- ativity, labor, and such constant sources of ener-
ment of credit, the centralized creation of mon- gy as geothermal heat, wind, tides, wave action, 
ey, interest, and particularly compound interest, falling water, and, most of all, the sun. We call this 
gradually destroyed that relationship. Wealth, of class of money solar dollars. A characteristic of 
course, can be defined even more broadly than wealth derived from this combination is that it 
money—the natural resources available to us, tends not to damage our life support system or to 
the homes that shelter us, or the closeness of endanger humankind as far as we know. It is also 
our ties to one another. the only kind of wealth that can actually feed peo-

ple. Unfortunately, this requires the conversion of 
Nevertheless, money is the oil that has kept the solar energy through plants that themselves de-
wheels of society turning and it remains a useful, pend on water and biologically active soils. Only 
if not essential, tool. It can be used more wise- when plants grow on regenerating soils would 
ly, and sustainably if you think in terms of the the money earned from timber, crop, or forage 
sources of wealth today’s money, or dollar, rep- qualify as solar dollars.
resents.

In practice . . . 
MINERAL, PAPER,  
AND SOLAR DOLLARS Ranchers and farmers are better off measuring 
Money derived from a combination of human their success in solar dollars rather than relying 
creativity, labor, and natural resources that are on the paper ones. The more you can generate 
mined, used once, or sometimes recycled we and rely on solar dollars, the more you insulate 
term mineral dollars. Coal, oil, gas, gold, and yourself from swings in land and commodity 
other minerals fall into this category, hence the prices, interest rates, and the like. All borrowing, 
name. Other natural resources can fall into this especially if it is based on the current real estate 

market, involves paper dollars to some extent, so 

p.7



obviously your position is more stable and reli- prove very costly in the long term. Nowhere is 
able if you can finance your plans out of solar this more apparent than when we use technol-
dollars generated by your operation. ogy to bolster production on deteriorating land, 

or to drastically modify an environment to better 
suit our purposes.

Consider the following examples:
•	 Suppose we want to change the succes-

sional level of a community. On unproductive 
rangeland, machines or herbicides will clear 
the brush and scrub, and we can drill in seed. 
Where a mixed forest makes logging incon-
venient, we can remove the native trees and 
plant uniform stands of faster growing spe-
cies that permit mass processing. When our 
chosen plants falter, we can kill their enemies 
and fertilize their soil. All these actions con-
flict with how nature functions. Successful as 
they appear, in the end they often fail, while 

Technology:  generating new, more severe problems. 

From Stone-Age spears When water cycles become less effective, we 
can use machines to scour out contour ridg-

to genetic engineering es to slow, spread or harvest runoff rainfall, 
and ditches to drain waterlogged soils, deep 

Technology encompasses an enormous vari- rippers to reverse the compaction caused by 
ety of human inventions—from computers to heavy wheels, and irrigation pumps to put 
farm machinery to global positioning satellite water back where it came from. In doing so 
systems, and genetic engineering. The use or we show little understanding of how water 
overuse of some technology, in the interest of cycles function and our immediate successes 
short-term solutions, often leads toward long- often result in long-term failure.
term challenges and adverse impacts we may •	 When mineral cycling is poor, we might turn 
not have anticipated. to a fertilizer salesman who can supply any-
TECHNOLOGY AND THE QUICK FIX thing our land lacks and change the soil pH 

to suit any crop. But the treatments need re-
Much technology developed out of our desire peating in ever-stronger doses, and the min-
to dominate nature, a desire that goes back a eral cycle does not improve. In fact, it is often 
long way. In resource management, agricul- damaged.
ture, health care, and many other fields, all but 
a few professionals define their work in terms •	 We want more energy flowing into cash 
of their technological tools. They rarely consid- crops, so we look to jungles, marshes, and 
er the broader principles that govern our eco- forests, believing that we can cut, burn, drain, 
system. It is not surprising then that so many irrigate, spray, or bulldoze them into any form 
of us devote our energy to quick, unnatural an- we imagine to achieve that end.
swers, and often achieve immediate, dramatic, 
and profitable results. Yet, such quick fixes can 

p.8



Forms of technology often used by the land manager

Technology, along with fire, rest, and living or- In North America, Africa and Australia, the ear-
ganisms, is never in and of itself bad; but as with liest people used fire a great deal, transforming 
all tools it must be used with great care. You whole landscapes in the process. The decima-
must check to make sure it is aligned with your tion of large animal populations, only exacer-
holistic context (see ebook #5) and leads to the 
achievement of your goals in the most socially, bated this situation. It was quite possibly the 

financially and ecologically sound way. combination of factors—fire, grazing animals, 
and predator-produced animal movement—that 

Fire: An ancient tool  created the lush and diverse grasslands found 
by early European settlers on the American prai-

tied to ancient beliefs rie. Today, large areas of Africa, Australia, and 
North America are dominated by vegetation that 

Fire has existed in nature for millions of years, is fire-dependent. Scientists cite evidence that 
but its use as a tool for intentionally modifying this is likely due to frequent burning by humans, 
our ecosystem is relatively new—perhaps a mil- which caused fire-sensitive species to disap-
lion years. The effects of fire will vary greatly pear. 
depending on numerous factors including the 
amount and frequency of precipitation following THE IMPACT OF FIRE ON 
the fire, how frequently an area is burned, the BIOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES

intensity of the burn, what other tools are used When deciding whether or not to use fire in any 
along with fire, and the brittleness of the envi- year, you need to understand what it does and 

does not do, and how it affects biological com-
ronment. munities. Those effects will vary depending on 

p.9



store cover, but the fact that bare soil makes rain 
less effective compounds that effect because 
the entire biological community is only operating 
on a portion of the rainfall received, the rest be-
ing lost to both surface evaporation and runoff 
(refer back to the discussion of the water cycle 
in ebook #2).

If the land is left undisturbed following a fire, 
soil cover accumulates even more slowly. The 
guidelines for burning detailed in Holistic Man-

how brittle the environment is and how high or agement (chapter 36) discuss using other dis-
low the rainfall. turbances with fire instead of the total rest so 
Fire is used far less as a management tool in nonbrit- commonly recommended. 
tle and less brittle environments simply because 
the higher year-round humidity inhibits fire, and it THE IMPACT OF FIRE  

ON PLANT COMMUNITIES
is more difficult to get vegetation to catch and stay 
alight. When fire is used in these environments they Fire affects plants in different ways. Some sen-
recover more quickly from its adverse effects than sitive perennial grasses disappear if burned. In 
do brittle environments. For this reason, the focus in brittle environments the majority of perennial 
this ebook is on brittle environments. grasses initially thrive when burned. This is in 

part because burning removes the old material 
THE IMPACT OF FIRE  that when allowed to accumulate premature-
ON SOIL SURFACES ly kills grasses. Some plants thrive on periodic 
In all environments, fire tends to destroy litter fire, having seeds adapted for establishing after 
and expose soil surfaces. Especially in low-rain- a fire. A number of grass seeds have awns or 
fall, brittle environments, the soil may remain tails that actually twist and drill the seed into ex-
bare for many years. As you recall from earlier posed soil when they become moist, suggesting 
discussion, the condition of the soil surface is an association with fire, which exposes soil. 
key to the functioning of all four ecosystem pro- Woody plants also respond to fire in different 
cesses, and uncovered soil is what we are striv- ways. Some are extremely sensitive, others 
ing to eliminate in any environment. Bare ground resilient. Most of the trees and shrubs consid-
becomes obvious right after a fire and remains ered problem species are resilient when burned. 
until new growth appears to hide it. More critical, Though they may appear dead immediately af-
however, is the time it takes to build up the litter terward, they soon resprout more stems than 
between plants. That depends on such things as before. Many tree species are damaged by fire, 
the brittleness of the environment, the amount yet some can still survive in the shrub form 
and pattern of rainfall, the amount of grazing or where burning is prolific. 
overgrazing by livestock or wildlife concentrat-
ing on the burned area (as they tend to do), and If fire is not followed by well thought-out soil 
the degree and timing of animal impact. disturbance, major changes within a communi-

ty can occur because fire tends to create bare 
Fire appears to have the most lasting impact ground that favors the few plant and animal spe-
where soil cover takes longest to form, the low- cies adapted to it. In a community where some 
er rainfall, very brittle environments. The lower mature organisms survive the fire, the new spe-
rainfall produces less vegetation that might re-

p.10



Fire and the Brittleness Scale

VERY BRITTLE NONBRITTLE
Generally reduces the Tends to damage water cycle by 

effectiveness of the water cycle; exposing soil; effect is temporary 
exposes soil and destroys litter. ← WATER  

CYCLE → due to better annual distribution 
The lower the rainfall the greater of humidity and more rapid 

the impact. succession on bare surfaces.

Speeds the mineral cycle in the 
Appears to speed up cycling of 

short term, converting dead 
material to ash; but it exposes ← MINERAL 

CYCLE → nutrients, although the effect is 
temporary.

soil.

In short term, increase diversity In short term, increase diversity 
of species; repeated fires reduce ← COMMUNITY 

DYNAMICS → of species; repeated fires reduce 
diversity. diversity..

Initially increases energy flow; 
in the long term, it reduces Disrupts the energy flow in the 

energy flow due to increased 
soil exposure leading to less ← ENERGY 

FLOW → short term, but it recovers quickly; 
frequent fires tend to damage all 

effective water and mineral four ecosystem processes.
cycles.

This summary assumes that the fire is followed by a period of rest, which is standard practice.

cies that establish on the bare soil may initial- but the population as a whole may suffer in the 
ly increase diversity. Frequent repetition of the long term. Many animals do not escape easily. 
burning, however, will provide a largely similar Many others do. Some are attracted to a fire be-
microenvironment over large areas for so long cause they can easily feed on insects and oth-
that complexity diminishes. A uniform micro- er small creatures fleeing the fire. It is a myth to 
environment leads to fewer species in general, think that larger game animals always panic and 
and often a near monoculture and low stability. flee from fire. Though people may drive them to 
Where a periodic fire can result, at least initially, panic with flames and noise, left alone and un-
in greater diversity, repeated frequent fires alone disturbed they usually just get out of the way 
tend to do just the opposite. calmly. Some animals appear to seek out burned 

areas very soon after a fire, especially when new 
THE IMPACT OF FIRE ON ANIMALS green growth appears. Through its influence on 
Animals, like plants, also vary greatly in their re- soils and vegetation, fire, especially when used 
sponse to fire. And like plants, the mature mem- frequently, has profound effects on animals too 
bers of a population may thrive in the short term, complex to cover here.

p.11



THE IMPACT OF FIRE  ing behavior—impact both soils and vegetation. 
ON THE ATMOSPHERE So do machinery and fire. A policy or practice of 
Perhaps the greatest impact of fire is on our at- withholding all of these forms of disturbance 
mosphere—directly through pollution, and in- completely for considerable time amounts to ap-
directly through soil damage. Biomass burning plying the tool of total rest. Partial rest is applied 
produces excessive amounts of ozone, carbon in the presence of livestock or wild grazers, but 
monoxide and methane that soils damaged by with such calm behavior in the absence of 
fire can no longer store as effectively. Thus fires pack-hunting predators that a large proportion 
(biomass burning) are a significant contributor to of the plant life and soil surface remains undis-
climate change. turbed despite their presence and grazing. Rest, 

in either form, can be good or bad, depending 
As with all tools, the decision of whether or not where the land lies on the brittleness scale, as 
to use the tool of fire should be checked to make you will see.
sure it is aligned with your holistic context. It is 
important to have clarity on the future landscape Partial rest is a relatively new concept that many 
you envision and how fire tends to affect that find hard to grasp. How can the land be rest-
landscape depending on where it lies on the brit- ing while high numbers of livestock or game 
tleness scale and how often you use it. If other are grazing on it? Its effects, however, vary lit-
tools can accomplish the same objective without tle from the effects of total rest and are evident 
exposing soil or polluting the atmosphere, then anywhere livestock or wildlife are spread out 
you might be wise to use them instead. and seldom bunch together. The more scattered 

they are, the greater the degree of partial rest.

Rest: The most Using rest in either form (total or partial) as a tool, 

misunderstood tool is a more recent idea than either fire or technolo-
gy; it dates back approximately 10,000 years to 
when cattle, sheep and goats were first domes-
ticated. But it is only in the last few decades that 
we have understood that the effects of rest vary 
greatly in brittle and non-brittle environments. In 
nonbrittle environments, rest is perhaps the most 
powerful tool there is for restoring biological di-
versity to degraded lands. But in brittle environ-
ments, which evolved with large herding her-
bivores and pack-hunting predators, rest tends 
to have the opposite effect, leading to a loss of 
biodiversity. Because this difference in response 
based on brittleness has largely gone unrecog-

High rainfall brittle environment in Zimbabwe. Without grazing nized, we have hastened the advance of deserts 
animals, the land would deteriorate. in the world’s brittle environments.

Disturbance comes in many forms. Rest as a tool EFFECTS OF REST IN  
to modify ecosystem processes refers to the rest NONBRITTLE ENVIRONMENTS
from disturbance—fire, physical disturbance by In nonbrittle environments (1 to 3 on a scale of 
animals, or technology. Large animals—domes- 1 to 10), old plant material by definition breaks 
tic and wild, particularly those that exhibit herd- down quickly through biological decay. Decom-

p.12



position starts close to the ground, where large a means to promote vigorous root growth. All 
populations of insects and microorganisms assist of this works so well in nonbrittle environments 
in the decay process. This close-to-the-ground that it masks the fact that it often doesn’t work in 
decomposition particularly suits perennial grass- brittle ones. In totally rested nonbrittle environ-
es, because dead leaves and stems weaken at ments, it is virtually impossible to expose vast 
the base and fall aside, letting light reach the areas of soil and keep them bare. The soil sur-
new, ground-level growing points. This rapid, face will cover over again quickly if totally rest-
bottom-up decomposition on dead woody veg- ed because the consistently high humidity pro-
etation as well as grasses allows nonbrittle bio- motes plant growth.
logical communities under total or partial rest to 
maintain a high degree of stability and species LEAVING IT TO NATURE 
complexity in grassland or forest. Some say it is better to leave the management 
Even very prolonged rest from the rare fire or of biological communities to nature because na-
physical disturbance has little or no adverse ef- ture knows how to manage them better than we 
fect on the water and mineral cycles, community do. Left to nature, most communities would even-
dynamics, and energy flow. tually regenerate. In less brittle environments that 

might happen fairly quickly because rest from hu-
man activity, including livestock grazing, is a pow-
erful tool for restoring biodiversity. In the more brit-
tle environments, which cover most of the earth’s 
land surface, the time scale for regeneration would 
be long, possibly a geological one. These lands will 
not recover within our lifetimes unless we restore 
the ecological processes through the use of ani-
mals that can simulate the effects produced by the 
herds and predators that once made these envi-
ronments functioning wholes.

EFFECTS OF REST IN  
BRITTLE ENVIRONMENTS
In very brittle environments (8 to 10 on a scale of 1 

Sheep grazing in a nonbrittle environment. If the tool of rest were to 10), by definition, old plant material breaks down 
applied, the grassland would revert to forest.

slowly and succession also progresses slowly, par-
ticularly when starting from bare soil. Most organ-

If your holistic context describes a future re- isms of decay, especially in communities that have 
source base that includes stable grasslands and lost biodiversity, are present in high numbers only 
you suspect that natural succession will lead it intermittently when moisture is adequate.
toward forest, then you need to avoid either form 
of rest (partial or total) to keep succession from Under total or partial rest conditions, if animal 
advancing to forest. Properly managed grazing numbers are also low, most of the breakdown of 
would help maintain a vigorous grass root sys- plant materials is through oxidation and phys-
tem that makes it difficult for tap-rooted, woody ical weathering. The tips of leaves and stems 
plants to establish. You could also use the tools break down first, as they are most exposed to the 
of fire or technology (mowing, for example) as weather, be it wind, rain, heavy snows, or hail. 

p.13



Some perennial grasses can withstand long pe-
riods of rest. These grasses usually have growth 
points that are above the ground in branching 
stems. This allows enough growth to keep the 
plant alive even when a mass of undecayed ma-
terial chokes most of it. Other rest-tolerant spe-
cies are very short in stature or can have sparse, 
thin leaves that can allow some light to reach 
ground-level growth points, in spite of an accu-
mulation of old growth.

When the soil surface in brittle environments re-
mains undisturbed, new plants do not easily re-
place those that are dead or dying. The capping 

Dying, overrested plant in a brittle environment created by rain falling on bare, rested soil offers 
poor opportunity for germinating seed. 

While this top-down breakdown has few neg- Very brittle, low-rainfall environments given 
ative effects on woody plants, it severely hin- extended periods of rest (partial or total) char-
ders perennial grasses with ground level growth acteristically have wide bare spaces between 
points that often remain shaded and obstructed perennial grass plants. These remaining plants 
for years. Old plant material that lingers through survive because light can reach the ground-lev-
the next growing season weakens most peren- el growing points around the edges of each 
nial grasses and over a period of several years plant, but the centers may already be dead. 
the accumulation can actually kill them. It also After adequate disturbance of the soil surface, 
negatively affects the diets and productivity of closely spaced perennials often do establish. 
grazing animals that try to balance their diets If such land is then rested again, however, the 
and avoid old, oxidizing plant material. closely spaced plants kill one another off pre-

Left: Rest (total or partial) applied as a tool in a  Right: Bare ground caused by years of total and  
brittle low rainfall environment in Southern Patagonia, Argentina, partial rest and continuous grazing in a low rainfall brittle 
leads to dead plants, bare ground, and malfunctioning ecosystem environment in New Mexico, USA.
processes. 

p.14



are smhaatudreeldy,,  aksi lolildn gg rtohwethm t hoaftf  has accumulated 
premona ttuhereml ys.h ades even the edges of the neigh-
 boring clump.
The effects rest tends to produce are 
simpTlheer  etfofe cdtes treersmt teinndes  atot  tphroed uecxet arerem eeas ier to 
endsp roefd itcht eat  bthriet telextnreemses  esncdasl eo.f  Itth ei sb rittleness 
mucshc amle.o Irt eis  dmifufcichu mlto rteo  dsifefiecu tlth teo  seefefe tchtess e ef-
of refesctt si nin  lleessss  bbrirttiltet leen veirnovnmiroenntms (e4 ntots 7  on the 
(in tbhreit tlmeniedsds lesc aolfe )t. hIne  thbersitet leennvierosnsm ents it can 
scaleb)e.  cYhaolule ncgainng' tt ob dee tseurmrein ea ta tw whhiicchh  point the 
poinet fftehcets  eoff freecstt sc hoafn gree osvte rc hfroamn geen hoavnceinr g soil 
fromc oevnerh, aennecrignyg fl sowoi, l acnodv teher, h eeanlethr gofy p erennial 
flow garansdse tsh teo  dhaemaalgthin go fth pemer. eInn tnhieasle  less brittle 
grasesnevsir otnom deontisn gth ed eafmfecatsg me atyo t atkhee mmu.c hI nlo nger 

to show up.
these less brittle environments the Total and partial rest in brittle environments  

produce bare ground and malfunctioning  
effecOtvse rmreastye dt asiktees tmenudc tho flaovnorg tehre etsot ablishment ecosystem processes.
showof  ubrpu.s h  and trees. Overgrazed sites tend to favor 
 the establishment of herbaceous forbs (weeds). The effects of partial or total rest vary widely de-
This Ifi sy owurh hyo ltishtiec cuosnete xot fd tohese  nHoto ilnivsotlivce  this kind pending on how brittle the environment is and 
Manaofg cehmanegne,t d foene’t dabppalcy ke itlhoeor p aartniadl  or total rest. the land’s current condition. In very brittle envi-
earliMesots t ionfd tihcea btrourssh  anrde  tcrereit eicnacrlo ianc hymoeunrt  many eroanrmlye nwtsa, rrensitn ing  esitihgenr .f oHrma visin egxt rae mcelelya dra m-
landc monasindearg ae pmroebnletm.   tTodhaey  foiwrsets  sittse epx istence to uagnindge rtos tbainoddivinergs itoyf  atnhde s oeifl fceocvtesr.  eWahcehn  the 
whenhe mavya kdoinsegs  aof  dtheec tiosoiol onf  riess tr, emaaliinzliyn pga rtial. tlaonodl ssi ttse snodmse wtoh eprer oind tuhec em iwddillel  ohfe tlhpe  byroitutle i-n 
that you could be wrong about that tnheasst  smcaolen, iptaorrtiianl go r ptortoacl eressst .s h ifts from being 
decisTiHonIN oKr  AacBtOioUnT a TnHdI Sit s intended  increasingly positive to increasingly negative in 
outcIonm the ss.p a rTsoel ye pnospulraete tdh baritt tlyeo eunv wiroinllm ents of Wterimthso ouf tm tahinitsa infeinegd sboail ccokv elor, oepne, rmgy aflnowy  and 
conttihneu we etsote mrn oUvneite tdo Swtatreds sw yheorue rt here are few rhaenalcthhye rpse rhenanviael  cgoransssiesst. eBnetclyau asep preliset dh as 

holisatnicimgaolsa lo, ny tohue  dlaentde, ram feinwe  pwerhenanti al grasses tshuceh  tcoleoalr lyo df ifpfearretnita tle nrdeesntc ibeys  adt tehfea euxlttr eomre s, 
the condition of rested land generally indicates 

woulwdi tgh ihvigeh y toluer atnhce feoar reliset sdto mwianartnei nthge scene. btheec uanudseerly tinhge byr ithtlaende sdsi foffi caun latrye ai.n 
the dBey cciosnitorans to, rin  athcet idoenn siesl yi np ofpauclatt ed brittle en- recognizing what was happening on 
wronvgiro. nTmheennts, o yf Ionudi am, thoenreit aorre mfoilrli otnhsa otf cattle on tIfh res lta isn ad t.o Wol yitohuo auret  tchoinnkisnigs toef nusti ng, consid-

the land. There, grasses that can withstand high er where the land sits on the brittleness scale, 
Telenvdeelsn ocf ioevse rogfra Rzinegs td o (mPinaarttei athle o larn dTsocatapel).  Ino n the tEhec cousryresntte cmon dPitri onc oefs tshees l aind V, aendr yth Be erfiftetcltes  

both cases, on similar types of alannd,  Nthoe nambrouitnttl e Envreirsto ins lmikeelyn ttos  p roduce—are they in line with the 
of bare ground between plants remains about future landscape described in your holistic con-
the same. Both are using partial rest to a great- text? The context checks in ebook #5 will help 
er extent  than any other tool, and restV geernye rBalrlyit tle you decide. Nonbrittle 

Wateprr oCmyoctlees  bare ground—the more bare ground, The following table summarizes the effects that 
the more brittle the environment.

Water and mineral cycles breecsot m(paer tial Wor attoetar la) ntedn dms itnoe prarol dcuyccel east  tbhuei eldx -
less effective  treme ends aonf dth me bariintttlaeinness sh sigcahl el.evels of ef-

fectiveness  
Mineral Cycle 
Community Dynamics Biological communities decline 

and greater simplicity and instabil- Biological communities develop 
ity ensue.  The lower the rainfall, to levels of great diversity and 
the greater the adverse effect. stability p.15

Energy Flow Declines significantly Reaches a high level 

Creating Healthy Land: Tools for Managing Our Ecosystem             11 



Rest (Partial or Total) and the Brittleness Scale

VERY BRITTLE NONBRITTLE

Water cycle becomes less ← WATER  
effective. CYCLE → Water cycle builds and maintains 

high levels of effectiveness.

eral cycle builds and 
Mineral cycle becomes less ← MINERAL Min

maintains high levels of 
effective. CYCLE →

effectiveness.

Biological communities decline 
reduced. When ahnde grredat eer sfimfpeliccitty  aondc curs, grazing and animBiaollo gimicalp coamcmtu onitfie cs doeuverlospe  
the same animinsatalbsil ittyr eansmuep. Tlhee  lcowoear trhse ← COMMUNITY 

e DYNiAnMvIoClS
→

ve the use otfo  lleivveilns ogf  gcreraet daivteursritey san din rainfall, the greater the adverse stability.  
plants, lay down littere,ff ercta. ise dust, service of management. The tool of 
chip soil surfaces—opening them to living organisms does likewise. But 
aeration—and coDmecplinaesc stig tnihficeamntly .enough← ENlEiRvGinY 

FLOW g orga→nisms sRteaacnhdess a  haigsh  alev el.
to provide seed-to-soil contact. separate tool for a couple of primary 
 reasons. First, it encourages us to 

Living Organisms: weigLhIV pINosGs OibRleG AbiNoIlSoMgiSc aAl NsDo lutions to 
Animal IBmioplaocgti cina lB troiottllse f oarn d a prCoOblMeMmU, NvIeTrYs uDsY NteAcMhnICoSlogical 
Nonbrittle Environments onesIn— thfeo rH eolxisaticm Mpalnea,g ecmroenpt fpraomlyewcuorlkt,u ar ebsro -

solving management and kiennt elinrec rsourpropuinndgs  bvoethr sthues e cmosoynstoemcu plrtoucerses  
 challenges cropopf icnomg;m ucnoitmy dmynuamniictsy a ncdo tmhep lilveinxgi toyrg anisms 
One of the greatest immediate verstuoosl  bpeecasutsice itdheeys  maenredly  hreeprrebsiecnitd tewso, a spects 
benefits froLmivin ag norigmanaisml si mrefperas tcot a lcl tahne  libvieng  things gardoef nth ec soammep tohsintgi.n Tgh ev deyrnsaumsic sc ohf eamny ibciaollo gi-
seen in thew ree hsatronersast tio mno adinfyd th e environment, from the cal community is manifested in living organisms. 

fertilizer use. Second, it makes us 
maintenancsme aollefs bt mriitcrtoleor geanivsmirsounsmed etonstu pplement And living organisms cannot be isolated from the 

treat the whole complex of life in an 
water catchsomil eprneptsar.a tWionhsi, lteo inpsaerctsi awle o mri ght use to communities they nurture and that nurture them. 

environment as a whole rather than a 
total rest caconn ssuumse tcaroinp  pseostisl,  tcoo livveesrto icnk  that help Most importantly, all living organisms both create 

restore or maintain grasslands, or to many menaun do afr ep ceresakteyd  obyr  tbhe cnoemfmicuinaitli ecsr tehaeyt uinrheabsi t 
nonbrittle environments, no 

other creatures we modify through breeding or we taanmd wpilel nro wt thitrhive a otu twsidilel .th em unaided.
technology exists that could replace 
animal imgpeanecttic  eonng inaelel ritnhge to r aacnhicevhee ssim, ilar aims.

farms, natiAosn aa tlo pola, lirvkinsg, o argnadni sfmosr eofsfetrs p otential biolog-
that cover itchale s obluutilokn so tfo  ma porsobt lebmr iattsl eop posed to tech-

environmennotslo,g iwcahl eonrees . eAitlshoe, irt  efoncromur aogfe s us to treat 
the whole complex of life in our environment as 

rest is so daa wmhaoglei rnagth etro t htahne a ss ao mil ecnou vofe dre trimental or 
 beneficial creatures that we either eliminate or 
The table omna kpea ugse  o1f.9 outlines the 
effects animal impact tends to 
produce on the ecosystem processes 
in very brittle and nonbrittle 
environments. 

 p.16

Living Organisms Living Organisms and 
The Most Complex Tool Community Dynamics 
  
Living organisms refers to all the The living organisms tool, because it 
living things we harness to modify an involves all life, will play a role in the 
environment, from the smallest forms of production and/or the future 
microorganisms used to supplement resource base described in your 
soil preparations, to insects we might holisticgoal. This is true no matter 
use to consume crop pests, to what type of business or other 
livestock that help maintain pastures situation you are managing.  Living 
that would otherwise revert to forest, organisms provide the bulk of the 
or to many other creatures we modify biological capital required to sustain 
through breeding or genetic our civilization.  In the Holistic 
engineering to achieve similar aims. Management® framework, a broken 
 line circles both the ecosystem 
The previously discussed tools of process of community dynamics 

Creating Healthy Land: Tools for Managing Our Ecosystem            22 



Japanese farmer and scientist, Masanobu Fu- animals, a powerful tool for reversing desert-
kuoka, used the principles of community dynam- ification and for better management of water 
ics and the organisms associated with particular catchments, croplands, forests, and wildlife.
successional levels to produce high yields of 
small grain crops without synthetic fertilizers, The third of the four key insights (ebook #1) 
compost, pesticides, soil disturbance, or weed- showed why the development of this tool was 
ing. He succeeded because his understanding of critical: in brittle environments relatively high 
community dynamics allowed him to use a great numbers of large, herding animals, concen-
number of plants, insects, birds, small animals, trated and moving as they naturally do when 
and microorganisms as tools in creating an envi- pack-hunting predators are present, are vital 
ronment where his grain thrived in the protec- to maintaining the health of the grasslands we 
tion of such complexity. thought they destroyed. 

Unlike Fukuoka, farmers operating in brittle envi- The examples in the table on page 19 provide 
ronments generally have to enlist larger animals to an idea of the power and versatility of this tool. 
aid in regenerating soils and soil life and to boost Animal impact can often play a vital role in the 
yields. The same is true when attempting to re- revegetation and maintenance of more brittle 
verse desertification in these environments. Trees environments and can also be an extremely use-
planted to prevent deserts spreading, effective as ful and practical tool for use in less brittle ones.
they may be as wind breaks, cannot grow and re- There are a number of other situations where 
produce independent of the level of development animal impact has been found to be the most 
of the biological community as a whole. Live- practical tool available. It is such a versatile tool 
stock, however, can be used to help cover the bare that Holistic Management practitioners can run 
ground and move succession forward. the risk of prescribing it as automatically as 
The domestication of livestock about 10,000 some folks now prescribe fire, rest, and/or tech-
years ago offered new possibilities for the use of nology. The context checks covered in ebook #5 
living organisms in the service of management, help prevent that.
but livestock were not recognized as such until 
very recently. Because their power to transform We have discovered in the 
whole landscapes through their physical impact lumbering, smelly, but 
and grazing is so significant we break them into powerful behavior of grazing 
two tools (animal impact and grazing) within the animals a significant tool for 
living organisms category and discuss their use 
in detail in the next two sections. reversing desertification and 

for better management of water 
ANIMAL IMPACT: REGENERATING catchments, croplands, forests 
SOILS AND SHAPING LANDSCAPES and wildlife. 
Animal impact refers to all the things grazing 
animals do besides eat. Instinctively we have 
considered defecating, urinating, salivating, rub-
bing, and trampling of large animals as generally 
inconvenient conditions of their presence. Re-
cently, however, we have discovered in the lum-
bering, smelly, but powerful behavior of grazing 

p.17



TIMING AND DONKEY DAYS again have 365 donkey days of trampling.

Suppose you have a small Someone passing by would remark on severe 
house on a hill and you and trailing and trampling of the stream bank. But 
your donkey fetch water each those ‘wounds’ would have 364 days of plant 
day from the stream below. growth and root development to heal before you 
After one year of trampling had to go back down to the stream.
the same path day after day, When you did head back to the stream, you 

a substantial gully forms and the stream bank would probably find both the trail and the load-
where you load the water becomes a trampled ing place overrun by new growth. In fact, both 
bog. might be greener and healthier than before with 
You could say that you have 365 donkey days the old grass removed and the manure and urine 
of trampling. For many years we observed such deposited, though they had still absorbed 365 
damage and said we had too many donkeys. donkey days of traffic per year.
Now suppose you took a herd of 365 donkeys So time, rather than animal numbers was the 
down the hill and hauled up a year’s worth of critical factor in trampling.
water in one morning. In this case, you would 

ANIMAL IMPACT AND STREAMS ble. Their steep edges are more prone to erosion 
Most stream banks should be well vegetated not and will keep cutting back, widening the stream 
only to stabilize them, but also to provide shade and making it shallower. Animal impact can 
and cover for fish. Bare stream banks are unsta- break down the sharp cutting edges and create 

conditions for plant growth to heal them.

Photos taken on a bridge of a stream in Wyoming, USA.  
Left: Upstream land—Properly managed using Holistic Management (250% increase in livestock numbers) Right: Downstream land—Managed 
conventionally. Same stream, same day, different management.

p.18



ANIMAL IMPACT IN BRITTLE AND exists that could replace animal impact on all 
NONBRITTLE ENVIRONMENTS the ranches, farms, national parks, and forests in 
One of the greatest immediate benefits from an- brittle environments, where either form of rest 
imal impact can be seen in the restoration and has the tendency to reduce soil cover.
maintenance of brittle environment water catch-
ments. While partial or total rest can sustain soil 
cover in nonbrittle environments, no technology 

Animal Impact and the Brittleness Scale

VERY BRITTLE NONBRITTLE

Periodic high impact tends to 
improve both water and mineral 

Periodic high impact generally 
cycles. However, while it tends to 

improves water and mineral 
sustain a grassland for example, 

cycles. WATER  
← & MINERAL → it may result in less effective 

Low impact reduces water and CYCLE water and mineral cycles than 
mineral cycles below the land’s possible in woodlands.

potential.
Low animal impact has little 

effect.

Promotes the advancement 
of biological communities on 

bare, gullied, or eroding ground; Periodic high impact maintains 
tends to maintain the biological grass root vigor and discourages 
community at grassland level, ← COMMUNITY 

DYNAMICS → establishment of woody plants 
preventing shift to woody and slows the shift to woody 

community. communities.
Low animal impact or partial rest 
tends to produce bare ground.

Periodic high impact tends to 
build community complexity Periodic high impact tends to 

and improve water and mineral increase energy flow, although 
cycles, and as a result increases when used to maintain grassland 

energy flow. ← ENERGY 
FLOW → in lieu of forest, energy flow will 

never reach its full potential.
Low impact reduces energy flow 
below its potential. The shortfall Low animal impact has little 
becomes severe if compounded effect.

by the overgrazing of plants.

p.19



 
WHAT ANIMAL IMPACT DOES
There are three primary things animal impact 
does and for which we use it as a tool:

1.	 Hoofed animals tend to compact the soil. 
With each step they concentrate a big weight 
on a small area.

2.	 When animals are excited or closely bunched, 
their trampling causes breaks and irregulari-

 ties on the soil surface.
3.	 Such animals tend to speed the breakdown 

and reduce the volume of plant material re- Here’s an example of what animal impact can accomplish. On the left is the before picture of Kachana in 
turned to the soil surface through their dung northern Australia. On the right is the same point seven years later. The only  tools applied were animal 
and urine. They also speed the return of un- impact and grazing. 
eaten old plant material to the soil surface 
through the litter they trample down. determines whether animal impact describe the results produced by a 

has a favorable or adverse affect on herd that is trampling the ground 
Whether any of these tendencies work for good land. It was also important to because they are excited or bunched. 
or bad on the land depends on management— distinguish between brittle The trampling pushes down the dead 
particularly of the time factor. Differences in the environments that required it and the plant material and chips and breaks 
utility of animal impact vary between the brittle nHoerne’sb anr eixtatmlepl e eofn wvhaitr aoninmaml imepnactt sca nt ahccaomt pdlisihd. O n tohet  hard soil surfaces. This is a result of 

otorp  ies txhep beforriee pnictcuree dof Kiatc hfaanar S tlaetiosns in. Western Australia. 
environments that evolved with large herds of their behavior and is different from 

On the bottom is the same point seven years later. The only tools the effects produced by animals 
grazers and the nonbrittle environments that did Saptploiedc wekre  aDnimeal inmpsacit tanyd g raazinng.d Herd calmly walking. Bunching naturally 
not or experienced it far less. occurs when animals are under threat 

Here’s an example of what animal impact can aSEcTcfOofemCKcpl tiDs hE.N OSnIT tYhe A leNfDt i sH tEhRe Dbe EfoFrFeE pCicTture of Kachabnya  pinr edators, in full migration, or 
northern Australia. On the right is the same point se ven years later. The only  tools applied were anwimhael n being driven or jostling each 
impact and grazing. TThhee h ehredirndgi nangi maanlsim thaalts c otnhtaritb uctoe nmtorsibt utot eth e 

other.  It also occurs when livestock 
maoinstte ntaon cteh eo f mthaei nmtoerne abnricttele  oefn tvhireon meonrtes  are run at ultra-high densities—1,000 

determines whether animal impact berhitatvle  ine na vvdiareroiesntcym roiefb nweta syt shb teeh hartae pvsreoud liuntcs ea  pd irffoerd-uced by tao 2,000 per acre (2,500 to 5,000 per 
has a favorable or adverse affect on evnat reifefetcyt so. Tf hwweoa rmydas n ttahhgaaemtt  episnrt o tgdruauidcmeelin pdelsiifn—fegsrt eotchnkte   groundh ectare) or more—and moved every 

deefnfesictyt sa.n dN oherrmd aelflfyland. It was also important to becauesc
 
et
y—o ts

u
hh
 
eo
uwsey  h

 
ao
t
rw
w
e o to

 o
e xh

fa crtin
h
te
e
es

 
ds  or buncfheewd h. ours or so. 

tmdistinguish between brittle heasne aegffeecmtse wnht egnuThe t ra
i
ap
d
mp
elylipi

nnlg
e
in 
sth wge  

h
pto

e
uo
n
sl 
 ohfe asn imdaol wn the d applying animal impact: stock ead 

environments that required it and thei plant material and chips and breaSkusc h ultra-high densities produce 
dmepancst.i Styto cakn dden hsiteyr rdef eersf ftoe tchte.  cSontocenktrinatgio n 
o enough behavior change to ensure 

nonbrittle environments that did not rfa ateni mdaelss cwrhiitbaheirnsd  a t shsoueb ilnu nusiutm orbff aelarcn edo,sf  o.a r Tngihrmaizsain ligss   a resulth iogfh  herd effect throughout most of 
or experienced it far less. dciovinsitoin,u aot uatsnhlye  gsiriuv epbnpe tohimrateev. di(oSotron ca kanin dg  irviaset end  difef-erent frotmhe  day and over most of the land.  

sucnribite so tfh lea nutdmh.eb Se ret offfc aeknci mtdsae lspn crsoointdtyinu urcoeeufsdlely c bstuysp  -animals  
Stock Density and Herd ptohrete cdo onnc ae gnciavtrelanm tuilonyint   woof fala lankndi,in mogr aw. lshB ouolenn g carahnziyin g  naturalNlyo rmally, grazing or walking animals 

asruEffect eab.u) Hnietr do feo ftfchecatut  relsafe nwrsd h toae ttn ha ena iymn ipgmaicvate lonsn   asoriels under thprlaecaet  their hooves carefully, avoiding 
amoment. Neither describes whether 

by predators, in full migration, orc oarse plants and barely breaking the 
tnhde  vaengeimtataiolsn 

  parroed ufceeedd biny ga  hqeurdie otlfy b uinnc ahe d 
a when being driven or jostling eacsho il surface. Their hooves still 
snpimThe herding animals that contribute reaalsd.  manner or bunched. It is this 

other.  It also occurs when livestococmk pact the soil to some degree, 
most to the maintenance of the more Nboerhmaavllyio, grr athazri

aneg
t 
  o
m
rru 

awk
nae lak

sitn
 
 g
a critical 
ultra-high densities—1p,0ar0t0ic ularly where the soil is wet or 

difference to the land.  animals place their 
brittle environments behave in a h where underground root structures 

 ooves caretfuoll y2, ,a0vo0id0in pg ecro aarscer ep l(an2t,s5 a0n0d  to 5,000 per 
variety of ways that produce differentb and organic matter are damaged or 

Waree lyu sbere athkhieneg t cetthraem rs eoh)ile  osrudrr f amecfeof. erTecht—e irt aohnodov ems oved every 
effects. Normally you use two of the still compact ftehew s ohil otou srosm oe rd esgore.e , particular-
management guidelines when ly where the soil is wet or where underground 

Cattle under Holistic Planned Grazing providing animal impact in  
Saoupthp Dalkyotian, agnd  Maonntiamna, UaSlA . impact: stock SCurecaht inuglt Hrae-ahlthigyh L adnedn: sTiotoielss f oprr Moadnuacgein g Our Ecosystem             21 
density and herd effect. Stocking enough behavior change to ensure 
rate describes the number of animals p.20

high herd effect throughout most of 
continuously supported on a given the day and over most of the land.  
unit of land. Stock density reflects  
the concentration of animals on any Normally, grazing or walking animals 
subunit of that land at any given place their hooves carefully, avoiding 
moment. Neither describes whether coarse plants and barely breaking the 
the animals are feeding quietly in a soil surface. Their hooves still 
spread manner or bunched. It is this compact the soil to some degree, 
behavior that makes a critical particularly where the soil is wet or 
difference to the land. where underground root structures 
 and organic matter are damaged or 
We use the term herd effect to 

Creating Healthy Land: Tools for Managing Our Ecosystem             21 



root structures and organic matter are damaged 
or reduced.

Animals that remain bunched (as wild herds do 
when under threat of predation, in full migration, 
or when being driven) will trample coarse plants, 
lay down litter, raise dust, chip soil surfaces—
opening them to aeration—and compact them 
enough to provide seed-to-soil contact. This 
behavior change can be induced in livestock by 
herders who keep them bunched for much of the 
day, by a combination of herding and portable 
fencing that also keeps animals bunched and 
moving frequently, or through the use of attrac-
tants (such as feed cubes) that excite them and 
keep them bunched briefly. 

Herd effect is a common occurrence in the wild. Domestic livestock 
managers can mimic this behavior in their herds by increasing herd 
size and keeping animals bunched.

p.21



Animal Impact vs Other Tools

SITUATION POTENTIAL USE  EFFECTS OF  
OF OTHER TOOLS ANIMAL IMPACT

In a fairly brittle high rainfall Fire would pollute the Periodic high animal impact, 
environment overrest has allowed atmosphere, while exposing soil together with grazing (but not 

plants to accumulate several and invigorating many of the overgrazing) could remove old 
years of old material. Roots have woody plants. material, invigorate existing plants 
suffered severe damage and the Chemicals or machinery might without exposing soil, create 
community has started to shift to clear the ground, but would not conditions for new plants to 

forbs, shrubs, and trees where we guarantee that plants would establish, and move the biological 
want to maintain open grassland. establish. community away from noxious 

weeds or woody plants.

Leafy spurge, knapweed, Thousands of dollars have Using continual doses of high 
snakeweed or some other already been spent attempting animal impact, followed by well-

noxious plant has invaded a piece to use chemicals or machinery planned recovery periods, cause 
of ground. or other forms of technology to the offending plants to diminish 

eradicate them. by moving succession beyond the 
stage that suits them.

Bare eroding ground is hastening One might fence off and seed this Subject the area to periodic heavy 
the desertification process in an area at great expense. animal impact by giving a large 

area. herd a few bales of hay. This 
excites them and concentrates 

them on that area. New plants can 
then establish on the broken, litter-
covered ground, at no cost or lost 

production.

Erosion gullies whose steep One could use a bulldozer to A herd of livestock or game 
banks offer no foothold to plants slope the banks, chewing up animals attracted to the gully can 

are spreading across an area. more land, consuming diesel fuel, break down the sharp cutting 
and polluting the air. edges and create conditions for 

plant growth to heal them. The 
high animal impact, while fixing 
the gully also tends to correct 

the noneffective water cycle that 
caused the damage in the first 

place.

p.22



GRAZING: ENHANCING PLANT Several examples from environments that lie closer to 
AND ANIMAL HEALTH AND the very brittle end of the scale show how widely the 
PRODUCTIVITY effects of either grazing or animal impact can vary:
Grazing ranks as a tool because as land managers •	 Grazing might be maintaining the health of in-
we can manipulate the intensity and timing of it and dividual plants, while low animal impact (partial 
the animal-plant relationships that govern it. Unlike rest) is simultaneously exposing the soil be-
some of the other tools, however, it has natural as- tween the plants as fewer new plants can es-
pects to it that humans did not design—the mouths tablish.
of livestock and other grazers, for example. And, •	 Grazing applied as overgrazing may weaken or 
though some innovations have been made in this kill some plants in the community, while at the 
regard, we generally do not teach them what to eat same time high animal impact is tending to in-
or how to behave. Because the ways in which they crease the number of plants, the amount of soil 
do these things are critical to the results of manage- cover, and the effectiveness of rainfall.
ment, it’s important that we understand them better. •	 Grazing, together with adequate animal im-
When we talk about grazing as a tool for man- pact, can maintain soil cover, keep grass plants 
aging land, it is important to remember the fourth healthy and more productive, and in general en-
key insight regarding timing. Overgrazing of plants hance the functioning of all four ecosystem pro-
and damage from trampling has less to do with the cesses. However, overgrazing combined with 
number of animals on the land, and more to do with low animal impact (partial rest) produces the op-
the amount of time the plants and soils are exposed posite effect. This latter combination is the most 
to animals. commonly applied and is the one with the great-

est tendency in the more brittle environments to 
In this section we will consider grazing as if animals lead to desertification.
float over the ground without dunging, urinating, 
salivating, or trampling as they feed. Though grazing The concept of grazing generally refers to simply 
never occurs apart from these things, separating the eating grasses, not other forms of vegetation, such 
act of grazing from the other simultaneous influenc- as brush, trees, and woody forbs, which are tech-
es of the animals on the land (animal impact) helps nically browsed. However, the tool of grazing en-
us to better understand the influence of each and compasses both. To better understand grazing and 
thus the use of each as a tool. overgrazing it helps to note the differences between 

annual and perennial grasses, and their relationship 
with grazing animals.

Cattle grazing under Voisin’s principles in the  Cattle grazing under Holistic Planned Grazing in moderately brittle 
nonbrittle Argentine Pampas. environment in Southern Africa

p.23



ner grasses do not appear to change form at 
different points on the brittleness scale, and 
they commonly become dominant where 
moisture is adequate, many plants are over-
grazed simultaneously and repeatedly, and 
animal impact is high.

•	 Severe grazers and some perennial grasses 
are dependent on each other. The buds, or 

If two types of grasses are grazed severely, more leaf is removed growth points, on perennial grasses of either 
from the three bunched grass plants (left) than from the one runner form occur either very close to the ground near 
grass plant (right), which spreads horizontally and has more leaf the plant base, or well aboveground, along or 
below the grazing height of the animal.

at the ends of the plant stems. The position 
•	 Annual plants include grasses and forbs that of these growth points probably indicates 

germinate, grow, and die in one season. Their the evolutionary development of the species. 
populations usually fluctuate widely in num- Those with growth points close to the ground 
bers from season to season. In some seasons probably evolved in close association with 
they may fail to establish altogether, leaving severe grazing animals that kept the plant 
the soil exposed. Annual grasses are less clear of old stems so that light could reach 
prone to overgrazing because they do not the growth points. If they remain ungrazed, 
live long enough; they generally begin to die these plants can die prematurely. They have 
once they have produced seed. in effect become animal dependent. Those 

•	 Perennial plants—be they grasses, forbs, plants with growth points well aboveground 
shrubs, or trees—can be very long lived. probably evolved in places under little or no 
Their populations fluctuate far less in num- pressure from severe grazers (such as on the 
bers, and their roots help to hold the soil in steep slopes of gorges), because they can be 
place year-round, keeping more soil covered set back by severe grazing, but they thrive 
throughout the year compared to lands dom- when rested. They are in effect rest-tolerant 
inated by annuals. The lower the rainfall and grasses. 
the more brittle the environment, the more 
important the role played by perennial grass- GRAZING AND OVERGRAZING
es in keeping the soil covered and stable. To grasp the difference between grazed and 
Most perennial grasses, however, can easily overgrazed plants, picture a healthy perenni-
be overgrazed. al bunch grass plant with ground-level growth 

•	 Perennial grasses mainly grow in two forms: points, and imagine that a large animal bites the 
upright or prone with lateral running shoots whole plant down to three or four centimeters 
above- or belowground. The more brittle the (an inch or two) above the soil. That is severe 
environment, the more likely the upright pe- grazing, but not unusual or bad in that most 
rennial grasses will appear as distinct bunch- herding animals evolved to graze in such a man-
es, the less brittle, the more likely they will ner. In the growing season, the plant receives 
appear as a sward or mat in which individual a brief setback while it uses energy previously 
plants are hard to distinguish. This variation converted from sunlight that it now takes from 
in the upright grasses can occur even within its crown, stem bases, or roots to reestablish 
a species, which may grow in a matted form new growing leaf. But it also receives a long-
in a less brittle environment but in a bunched term boost because the plant tends to end the 
form in a more brittle environment. The run- season better off and less encumbered with old 

p.24



leaf and stem than its ungrazed neighbors. The These reserves are critical in carrying the plant 
growth points at the base remain intact, and no through the dormant period and supporting the 
old growth of the previous year stands in the first growth of the following season. If bitten 
way of regeneration. during the early growing season, when much of 

the reserves have already been tapped to pro-
The soil also receives a boost because any time vide that initial growth, plants have to use what 
a plant is severely defoliated while growing, root little energy is left to sustain the growth. This 
systems die back and become feed for commu- happens at the expense of the roots. If subse-
nities of bacteria, leaving porous passages and quent bites occur before the roots have reestab-
carbon-rich biomolecules that are aggregated lished, roots will die. Eventually the root mass 
into a sticky substance called humus. When the decreases until the plant dies.
animals move on, the root systems regrow along 
with the aboveground leaves. The process re- So a simple definition of overgrazing is any graz-
peats itself when the regrown perennial grass is ing that takes places on leaves growing from 
grazed again, increasing soil porosity and water roots that have not yet recovered from a previ-
and carbon content at the same time. ous grazing.

Overgrazing occurs when a plant bitten severe-
ly in the growing season, gets bitten severely 
again while using energy it has taken from its 
crown, stem bases, or roots to reestablish leaf—
something perennial grasses routinely do. This 
can happen at three different times:

1.	 When the plant is exposed to the animals 
for too many days and they are around to re-
graze it while it’s trying to regrow;

2.	 When animals are moved away from it but 
allowed to return too soon and graze the 
plant again while it is still using stored energy 
to reform leaf; or

3.	 Immediately following dormancy, when Sheep overgrazing in nonbrittle northern England
the plant is growing new leaf from stored 
root energy.

A simple definition of 
In the growing season, any time a plant is severe- overgrazing is any grazing that 
ly defoliated, root growth halts as energy is re-
directed from growing roots to regrowing leaves. takes place on leaves growing 
This movement of energy back and forth be- from stored energy, at the 
tween leaves and roots is important to sustaining expense of roots, rather than 
the plant over dormant, nongrowing periods. At directly from sunlight. In a 
the end of the growing season, perennial grass- sense, overgrazing is ‘grazing of 
es transfer nutrients and energy from leaves and the roots.’
stems to crowns, stem bases and/or roots.

p.25



If the grass plant is a runner type rather than 
erect or bunched, there is less danger from 
overgrazing, even when animals linger too long 
or return too soon. When plants are severely 
grazed, a lesser percentage of leaf is removed 
than with an upright plant. So much leaf, as well 
as stems with growing points, remain below the 
grazing height of most animals that fewer roots 
are affected. This helps to explain why, as bunch 
grasses are severely damaged or killed by over-
grazing, that space tends to be filled in with a 
runner grass as long as there is sufficient mois-
ture to sustain it; hence the runner grass mats so 
common close to water points and areas of very 
high animal concentration.

IMPACTS OF OVERGRAZING 
PERENNIAL GRASSES
If the aboveground part of the plant grows less, 
it provides less material to feed the animals and 
less leaf and stem to cover the soil as litter and 
mulch.

In the more brittle environments, most soil cover 
comes from litter, rather than the bases of living 
plants. If the root mass of the plant is reduced, 
less energy and organic material are available 
for soil life.

GRAZING AND  
THE BRITTLENESS SCALE
The table on page 27 summarizes the effects 
the tool of grazing tends to produce on eco-
system processes in very brittle and nonbrittle 
environments. These are the straightforward 
tendencies that can guide you in your manage-
ment decisions. In reality, they interact with so 
many other factors that you cannot always pre-
dict how significant their impacts will be. But, 
knowing what these tendencies are will enable 
you to monitor your use of the grazing tool more 
effectively.

p.26



Grazing and the Brittleness Scale

VERY BRITTLE NONBRITTLE

Will not expose soil, but cause 
Enhances water and mineral ← WATER CYCLE → even denser cover; will thus 

cycles by maintaining healthier enhance water and mineral 
and more stable root mass, cycles in grasslands.

increasing microorganism activity 
and aeration, and producing 
plants with more shoots and 

leaves that later provide more 
litter. ← MINERAL 

CYCLE → Enhanced by grazing in 
grasslands

Maintains grassland 
communities, increases their 

diversity and covers soil, retards Because plant spacing is 
shifts toward woody species. naturally close and soil cover 

← COMMUNITY 
Increases organic content, DYNAMICS → hard to damage; grazing tends to 
structure, aeration, and soil maintain grass root vigor, soil life, 
biological activity because and structure

more leaf and more roots are 
produced.

Increases energy flow by 
promoting vigorous root and leaf 
growth. Healthier, more massive ← ENERGY Grazing increases energy flow; 

FLOW → both above- and belowground in 
root systems support millions of natural grasslands and pastures.
microbes and below ground life.

Note: Overgrazing of grass plants tends to produce the opposite effects of regenerative grazing. These effects, or tendencies, are difficult to isolate 
because overgrazing is commonly associated with prolonged time on the land, low density of animals and thus high partial rest. Generally, in 
brittle environments, partial rest tends to be more damaging to all four ecosystem processes than overgrazing of plants.

p.27



Holistic Management Framework
WHOLE UNDER MANAGEMENT

Decision Makers  —  Resource Base  —  Money

HOLISTIC CONTEXT

(Statement of Purpose)  —  Quality of Life  —  Future Resource Base

ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES

Water Cycle Mineral Cycle Community Dynamics Energy Flow

ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT TOOLS

Living Organisms
Human Creativity Technology Fire Rest • Animal Impact Money & Labor

• Grazing

ACTIONS AND DECISION MAKING

Objectives, Goals, Tactics, Strategies, Policies
Customary Selection Criteria (past experience, expert advice, research, etc.)

CONTEXT CHECKS

Cause & Weak Link Marginal Gross Energy Sustainability Gut Feel
Effect • Social Reaction Profit Money 

• Biological Analysis Source 
• Financial Use

MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES

Time Stock Density Cropping Burning Population 
& Herd Effect Management

PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES FEEDBACK LOOP
Holistic Financial Holistic Land 

Planning Planning PLAN
(ASSUME WRONG) MONITOR

Holistic Planned Holistic Policy 
Grazing Development THE  

FEEDBACK 
LOOP

Holistic Research 
Orientation REPLAN

CONTROL

p.28



Glossary adequately disturbed. In such environments it 
is very easy to produce millions of acres where 

ANIMAL IMPACT  The sum total of the di- the ground between plants is bare or algae- or 
rect physical influences animals have on the lichen-capped, merely by resting the land ex-
land—trampling, digging, dunging, urinating, cessively, burning it frequently, or overgrazing 
salivating, rubbing, and so on. Most commonly many grass plants. Such areas tend to maintain 
achieved by herding animals in high concentra- biodiversity and stability only when they receive 
tion. The larger the herd, the greater the effect. adequate disturbance periodically.

BIODIVERSITY   The diversity of plant and COMMUNITY DYNAMICS  The develop-
animal species and their genetic material, as well ment of communities of living organisms. This 
as the age structure of their populations within a process is ongoing due to the constant interplay 
given community. of species, changing composition, and chang-

ing microenvironment. However, the greater the 
BRITTLENESS SCALE  All terrestrial envi- biodiversity within a community, the more com-
ronments, regardless of total rainfall, fall some- plex, and thus the more stable, it tends to be.
where along a continuum from nonbrittle to very 
brittle. For simplicity, we refer to this continuum DESERTIFICATION  A process character-
as a 10-point scale, 1 being nonbrittle and 10 ized by a loss of biodiversity, plant mass, and soil 
being very brittle. Completely nonbrittle environ- cover. Symptoms include increased incidence of 
ments are characterized by (1) reliable precipita- flood and drought, declining levels of soil organ-
tion, regardless of volume; (2) good distribution ic matter, increased soil surface exposure, and 
of humidity throughout the year as a whole; (3) a erosion.
high rate of biological decay in dead plant mate- ENERGY FLOW  The flow of energy from the 
rial, which is most rapid close to the soil surface sun to green growing plants, which convert the 
(thus, dead trees rot at their bases and topple energy (through photosynthesis) to the food that 
over relatively quickly); (4) speedy development fuels all life. Sunlight energy does not cycle, it is 
of new communities on any bare surface; and a one-way flow through our ecosystem.
(5) the development of complex and stable com-
munities even where they are not physically dis- HERD EFFECT  The impact on soils and veg-
turbed for many years. In such environments it is etation produced by a herd of bunched animals. 
virtually impossible to produce or maintain mil- Herd effect is not to be confused with stock den-
lions of acres where the ground between plants sity, as they are different, although often linked. 
is bare, other than on croplands that are continu- You can have high herd effect with very low 
ally exposed by machinery. Very brittle environ- stock density (e.g., the bison of old that ran in 
ments, on the other hand, are characterized by: very large herds at very low stock density, as the 
(1) unreliable precipitation, regardless of volume; whole of North America was the paddock.) You 
(2) poor distribution of humidity through the can have high stock density with no herd effect, 
year as a whole; (3) the chemical (oxidizing) and such as when two or three animals are placed in 
physical (weathering) breakdown of dead plant a half-hectare (one-acre) paddock. At ultra-high 
material, generally slowly and from the upper densities, the behavior of livestock will change 
parts of plants downward (thus, dead trees re- adequately to provide herd effect. 
main standing for many years); (4) very slow de- Note: Herd effect is the result of a change in ani-
velopment of communities from bare soil surfac- mal behavior and usually has to be brought about 
es unless physically disturbed; and (5) algae and by some actual management action—stimulat-
lichen covering soil surfaces for centuries unless 

p.29



ing the behavior change with the use of an at- accumulating dead oxidizing material prevents 
tractant, crowding animals to ultra-high density, light from reaching growth points at the plant’s 
or, on large tracts of land, herding animals—the base and hampers new growth, weakening 
larger the herd, the better—and keeping them or eventually killing the plant. Overrest occurs 
bunched through much of the day. mainly in the more brittle environments, where, 
HOLISTIC PLANNED GRAZING  The in the absence of large herbivores, most old ma-
planning of livestock moves using a step-by- terial breaks down in sunlight through oxidation 
step planning guide that enables managers to and weathering rather than biological decay.
deal with a great degree of complexity, and a PLANT LITTER  Dead plant material—
grazing chart. The planning enables you to inte- leaves, stems, twigs, bark, needles that has fall-
grate any type of grazing livestock—taking into en or been trampled onto the ground. Plant litter, 
account their behavior and their time on or off rather than living plants, provides most of the 
any unit of land—with other land users and uses soil cover in brittle environments. 
(wildlife, cropping, forestry, etc.,) while catering 
for many variables, issues or problems, such as RECOVERY PERIOD, EFFECTIVE  A pe-
droughts. Holistic Planned Grazing is suited to riod in which a severely-grazed plant has actu-
all environments, to any size of farm, ranch, or ally grown new leaves and stems and restored 
pastoral grazing area, and with or without fenc- energy reserves in, depending on the species, 
ing. reestablished roots, stem bases, or crowns. This 

can occur only under active growing conditions.
MINERAL CYCLE  The movement of miner-
al nutrients from soil to plants and animals and REST, PARTIAL  This takes place when 
back to soil again. A healthy and productive en- grazing animals are on the land but widespread 
vironment will promote the movement of miner- with little bunching behavior and herd effect. 
als from deep soil layers to aboveground plants Even when plant overgrazing is stopped with 
with a minimum of mineral loss from soil erosion Holistic Planned Grazing, partial rest remains a 
or mineral leaching. problem in brittle environments on large fenced 

ranches (as opposed to where livestock are 
OVERGRAZING   This occurs when a plant herded), where it can cause land improvement 
that has been bitten severely in the growing sea- to stagnate if not detected and acted upon. In 
son gets bitten severely again while using energy less brittle environments partial rest may result 
it has taken from its crown, stem bases, or roots in a build up of moss communities and a succes-
to reestablish leaf. Generally, this results in the sional advance to woody plants.
eventual death of the plant. In intermediate stag-
es it results in reduced production from the plant. REST, TOTAL   Prolonged nondisturbance of 
Overgrazing commonly occurs at three different soils and plant or animal communities. A lack of 
times: when the plant is exposed to the animals physical disturbance (by animals or machinery) 
for too many days and they are around to regraze or fire.
it as it tries to regrow; when animals move away STOCK DENSITY  The number of animals 
but return too soon and graze the plant again run on a subunit (paddock or grazing division) 
while it is still using stored energy to re-form leaf; of land at a given moment of time. This could be 
and immediately following dormancy when the from a few minutes to several days, depending 
plant is growing new leaf from stored energy. on the grazing plan. Usually expressed as the 
OVERRESTED PLANT  A bunched peren- number of animals (of any size or age) run on 
nial grass plant that has been rested so long that one hectare or acre. Some express this as total 

p.30



weight of animals on a unit of land.

STOCKING RATE  The number of animals 
run on a unit of land usually expressed in the 
number of hectares or acres required to run one 
full-grown animal throughout the year or part 
thereof.

SUCCESSION  An important aspect of com-
munity dynamics, succession describes the 
stages through which biological communities 
develop. As simple communities become ever 
more diverse and complex, succession is said to 
be advancing. When complex communities are 
reduced to greater simplicity and less diversity, 
succession is set back. If the factors that set it 
back are removed, succession will advance once 
again.

WATER CYCLE   The movement of water 
from the atmosphere to the soil (or the oceans) 
and eventually back to the atmosphere. An ef-
fective water cycle is one in which plants make 
maximum use of precipitation, little evaporates 
directly off the soil, and any runoff causes no 
erosion and remains clear. Also a good air-to-
water balance should exist in the soil, enabling 
plant roots to absorb water readily. For the wa-
ter cycle to be effective in brittle environments, 
the soil must be covered with living plants or lit-
ter, as vast amounts of water are lost through 
the bare, exposed soil between plants.

p.31