EBOOK ONE

The Foundations of 
Holistic Management



Copyright © Savory Institute 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other elec-
tronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other 
noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to the 
publisher, addressed ‘Attention: Permissions Coordinator,’ at the address below.

Savory Institute
885 Arapahoe Ave,
Boulder, Colorado 80302, USA
contact@savory.global
http://savory.global



The Foundations of  
Holistic Management

Contents

INTRODUCTION	 4
Holistic Management delivers results	 4
Improving resource management in these challenging times	 4
The time for Holistic Management	 6

THE KEY INSIGHTS OF HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT	 8
First key insight:	 8
A holistic perspective is essential in management—Nature functions in wholes
Second key insight: 	 9
The brittleness scale and how it affects the land’s response to the influences upon it
Third key insight: 	 11
The predator-prey connection and land health in brittle environments
Fourth key insight:	 11
Time rather than numbers governs overgrazing (and over-trampling)

NURTURING OUR PLANET THROUGH HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT 	 12
Ecosystem processes: Understanding the language of the land	 12
Tools for managing ecosystem processes	 13

CORE COMPONENTS OF HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT	 14
Whole under management: Clarifying what you are managing	 14
Holistic context: Creating the context for your management	 14
Actions and decision making: Selecting appropriate tools and actions	 14
Context checks: Using the seven checking questions	 15
Feedback loop: Monitoring proactively	 15



PLANNING AND MONITORING PROCEDURES 	 16
Building wealth	 17
Land and livestock management	 18

GUIDELINES FOR USING THE MANAGEMENT TOOLS	 21
HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK	 23
GLOSSARY	 24



Introduction from a holistic perspective. By understanding 
how nature functions and managing your re-

HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT  sources to enhance symbiotic relationships, ev-
DELIVERS RESULTS eryone wins. 
For over 40 years Holistic Management has de- You use Holistic Management in conjunction 
livered results for land managers and those who with the tools you already have in your toolbox, 
care for the land. Whether you are a commer- maximizing your effectiveness as a decision 
cial or subsistence farmer, rancher, pastoralist, maker and resource manager.
environmentalist, government employee, or in-
formed consumer, Holistic Management gives If you are a land manager, you can enhance your 
you the management tools to understand nature ability to interact with and manage your resourc-
and work with it. This whole farm/whole ranch/ es by looking carefully at the environment in 
whole conservation area/whole community/ which you live—at the soil cover, moisture, and 
whole system approach to resource manage- fertility, the variety of living organisms on the 
ment provides you with some key principles and land around you, and how well plants are cap-
practices that will help you manage land to im- turing the sun’s energy. All these and many oth-
prove its health and create a sustainable future er factors affect how productive your land will 
for generations to come. be, not only today, but if you do your job well 

and manage your resources carefully, far into 
Thousands of people are managing holistically the future. You are not simply a land manager, 
to improve land health and productivity, increase but a land steward. And, when you consciously 
profitability, and improve the quality of life for all address your social and economic needs in the 
who rely on the resources managed. This ebook process, you will have a greater ability to sustain 
provides an overview of the Holistic Manage- the progress you have made on the land. 
ment basics and is the starting point of a journey 
that will enable you to masterfully create the re- Healthy environments support a variety of dif-
sults you want now and for future generations. ferent living things, from the tiniest soil organ-

isms, to the plants that grow above the soil sur-
IMPROVING RESOURCE face, to the animals that harvest them and cycle 
MANAGEMENT IN THESE the nutrients back into the soil. This biodiversity 
CHALLENGING TIMES brings strength and balance to an environment. 
Resource managers everywhere are challenged If you do a good job managing your land resourc-
by declining land productivity, increasing costs es, you build and sustain diverse populations of 
of production, pressures from the global market- living things and enhance the environment that 
place, onerous government regulations, extreme sustains us all.
weather, changes in societal attitudes about land Holistic Management, simply put, helps us make 
use, and a host of other concerns. Most people better, more informed decisions that balance so-
who want to learn more about Holistic Manage- cial, environmental, and financial considerations, 
ment have already heard about the solid results while leading us in the direction we want our 
people achieve: increased profits, stocking rates, lives to take.
and crop yields, and the return of springs and 
creeks along with increased production of many 
perennial grasses, much more wildlife, and im-
proved quality of life. Holistic Management will 
help you assess your situation and manage it 

p.5



THE TIME FOR HOLISTIC The focus of this series of ebooks is on the ecolog-
MANAGEMENT ically regenerative, economically viable, and social-
A new approach is needed to address the most ly sound management of the world’s grasslands. 
pressing global problems we face today: global cli- These environments comprise two-thirds of the 
mate change, failing agriculture, increased droughts earth’s landmass. Their degradation has been on-
and flood events, catastrophic rates of soil erosion, going since the first hominids discovered the tool 
hunger and poverty, among other disasters, com- of fire, and has accelerated in concert with the ex-
bined with the broadening recognition that our eco- pansion of the human population (with its asso-
nomic models, based on the flawed presumption of ciated reduction and in some cases eradication of 
infinite growth in a world of finite resources, are in- most of the world’s large wild grazing and brows-
herently unsustainable. This new approach needs to ing animals, their subsequent replacement with 
involve a paradigm shift, a whole new way of think- fewer numbers of more sedentary, domesticated 
ing, because the old ways of thinking have helped livestock, and soil-degrading cropping practices).
create these global problems. Land degradation starts with a loss of soil cov-
Holistic Management is that paradigm shift. er, composed of both living plants and decaying 
First conceived and developed by Zimbabwean plant litter, which leads to less effective water 
ecologist, game ranger, politician, farmer, and and mineral/nutrient cycling, reduced solar en-
rancher Allan Savory over 40 years ago, Holis- ergy flow, and reduced biodiversity in terms of 
tic Management is guided by a decision making species and numbers of individuals within them. 
and management framework (shown on page This degradation can lead to the loss of previ-
30) that helps ensure economic, ecological, and ously sequestered soil carbon (a major source 
social soundness, simultaneously, both short- of our existing atmospheric CO2 load), severely 
and long-term (see biography at http://savory. degraded land or desertification, and the loss of 
global). Savory articulated four key insights that food production capacity. 
are pivotal to our understanding of the natural 
world—insights that underpin the Holistic Man- The Green Revolution, based on high input, indus-
agement framework. Holistic land, grazing, and trial agriculture (massive inputs of petrochemicals 
financial planning procedures enable on-the- and herbicides, monoculture cropping, and con-
ground managers to effectively handle the inher- finement animal feeding operations) has increased 
ent complexity of stewarding natural ‘wholes.’ global food production tremendously, but has 

tended to severely degrade its ecological and so-
cio-cultural capital base in the process.

The Green Revolution has not been characterized 
by ecological or social integrity—quite the contrary. 
Horrific soil erosion, dead zones at the mouths of 
rivers, severely depleted levels of biodiversity, im-
poverished rural communities, soil fertility loss, and 
oxidation of soil organic matter have been exac-
erbated by the Green Revolution in many places. 
The good news is that land degradation can in 
most cases be reversed, and this is the task in 
which Holistic Management practitioners have 

Allan Savory, Founder of Holistic Management been engaged for over 40 years. We now have 

p.6



successful Holistic Management practitioners 
spread across the globe, from Canada to the tip 
of Patagonia, to Europe to Zimbabwe, to Aus-
tralia to Montana. We posit the necessity of a 
new ‘Revolution’ (perhaps a Brown Revolution), 
based on the regeneration of covered, organi-
cally rich, biologically thriving soil, healthy plants 
and animals, and brought to fruition via millions 
of human beings returning to the land and pro-
ducing food.

The more humid, reliable rainfall regions of the Bison rancher and holistic manager Mimi Hillenbrand  showing her 
world will have to develop agricultural models grazing and land plans. Photo by Kirk Gadzia.

based on small, bio-diverse farms, imitating the 
natural, multi-tiered vegetation structures of these it in the process. In these environments, ranches 
environments. This is where most of the grain, and grazing lands should be moving to ever-larg-
fruits, nuts, and vegetables will be produced. To er management units (which may be achieved 
be ecologically manageable these farms will need through collaboration if not through ownership), 
to be small and highly diverse. The Holistic Man- allowing for larger herds.
agement framework will have an essential role to 
play in the management of farms in these envi- The implications of taking this management ap-
ronments, but it will be the farmers familiar with proach to scale in the grasslands of the world are 
local conditions who develop the practical know- massive. Slight increases in soil organic matter over 
how, insights, and production models that will these huge portions of Earth’s landmass, may re-
lead to success on the ground. sult in the long-term safe and natural sequestration 

of many gigatons of carbon. In effect, we would be 
Most people managing holistically are more putting masses of carbon back where it belongs—
versed in the other two-thirds of the world— in the soil—and more importantly, where it can ac-
the grasslands. Broadly defined, grasslands are tually do some good. Organically rich soils feed soil 
those environments in which grasses play a crit- bacteria, protozoans, and fungi, active populations 
ical role in stabilizing soil—from dry deciduous of which lead to ever greater plant-available nutri-
forests to savannas or open grasslands to arid ents and less and less dependence on outside fer-
and semiarid rangelands. These are environ- tilizer inputs.
ments that co-evolved in the presence of large Soils that are higher in organic matter also possess 
grazing herbivores, in conjunction with their greater water holding capacity, thereby increasing 
pack-hunting predators, and in most instanc- drought resilience and water infiltration, which may 
es they are characterized by seasonal or erratic lead to regenerating aquifer and ground water re-
rainfall, and extended periods of the year with serves critical for cities and communities through-
very low atmospheric and soil humidity. The out the globe. In the process of doing this—in effect, 
presence of these large herbivores, interacting with mimicking nature—there is no creation of ‘waste’ as 
their landscapes the way nature intended, is critical. it actually becomes an asset, input costs are dra-
Via the skillful practice of Holistic Planned Grazing, matically reduced, animals tend to be healthier and 
we can effectively mimic this behavior, reversing more productive, and profit (based on ecological 
land degradation, and generating solar-based prof- integrity, or true wealth, derived directly from the 

p.7



sun) is the result. Of course, we also are producing business, a community, or a nation, can be man-
nutrient-dense, pasture-produced protein—ex- aged without looking inward to the lesser wholes 
actly what our Paleolithic, hunter/gatherer-evolved that combine to form it, and outward to the great-
physiology is designed to consume. er wholes of which it is a member. 

The Key Insights of “Individual parts do not exist in 

Holistic Management nature, only wholes, and these 
form and shape each other.”  

The four key insights brought to light by Allan Allan Savory
Savory and discussed at length in Holistic Man-
agement: A Common sense Revolution to Re- If you want to effectively manage your land re-
store Our Environment (Third Edition), are the sources, improve biodiversity status, increase 
foundation of Holistic Management. Once you production, create profit, and lead your desired 
understand these key insights you will be better quality of life, it is important to understand that 
able to see how your actions can be designed you cannot change or control one thing in one 
to enhance the land’s health and productivity. area without having an impact on something else 
The first insight makes the argument for why a in another. In this way, each whole is unique be-
Holistic Management framework was needed cause of the different variables and relationships 
and the form it should take. The next three in- at play.
sights enable us to understand why some en-
vironments rapidly deteriorate under practices Allan Savory says, “Not only is the world more 
that benefit others, and add pieces to the new complex than we understand, it’s more complex 
framework that proved vital for completing it. than we can EVER understand. For centuries hu-

mans have tried to manage land with little success 
FIRST KEY INSIGHT because on its own land is not manageable. The 
A holistic perspective is essential in land is so tied to the culture of the people and to 
management—Nature functions in wholes the economy that all three need to be managed 
You are probably familiar with the phrase, ‘the indivisibly, as we do when managing holistically.” 
whole is greater than the sum of its parts’ as a SECOND KEY INSIGHT
way to describe holism. A more telling descrip-
tion would be that nature (including humans) The brittleness scale and how it affects the 
functions in wholes and patterns. In other words, land’s response to the influences upon it 
what we view as ‘parts’ of a whole are merely dif- The second insight overturns the belief that all 
ferent aspects of that whole. To view it as a part environments respond in the same manner to 
suggests we can remove it or replace it and the the same influences. They don’t. Resting an en-
whole will remain the same—like a machine. vironment, for instance, can restore it - in some 

places - but it can lead to desertification in oth-
In taking a holistic perspective, we recognize ers. The difference depends on how ‘brittle’ the 
that we must pay attention to the relationships environment is.
that exist between these different aspects of the 
whole. In this way we can build or make use of Environments can be classified on a brittleness 
those that are symbiotic, or mutually-beneficial, scale that ranges from 1 (evergreen tropical 
which is necessary for effective management. forest) to 10 (true desert) based on how well 
We now realize that no whole, be it a family, a humidity is distributed throughout the year, and 

p.8



THE BRITTLENESS SCALE

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  1 0
According to the brittleness scale, a 

rainforest would be a 1 and a desert would 
be a 10.

how quickly dead vegetation breaks down. All 
environments appear at some point along this 
scale, as represented in the diagram above, and 
will respond differently to some of the same in-
fluences, depending on the degree of brittle-
ness. 

At the nonbrittle end of the scale, humidity is pe-
rennial and dead vegetation breaks down rapid-
ly and biologically because the microorganisms 
of decay are present throughout the year. The 
main herbivores in such environments are in-
sects. Larger herbivores tend to be solitary as 
well as their predators.

At the very brittle end of the scale humidity is 
seasonal and precipitation erratic even within 
the growing season. Dead vegetation tends to 
break down slowly through chemical decompo-
sition (oxidation) and weathering in the absence 
of large herbivores, which would otherwise 
trample dead leaves to the ground or graze them 
and break them down through digestion. Prior 
to human intervention, the main herbivores in 
these environments were large herding animals 

p.9



that were kept bunched and moving through environments are high on the brittleness scale 
the influence of pack-hunting predators. because for long periods during each year the 

atmosphere is very dry.
Toward the nonbrittle end, dead grass leaves 
and stems are soft, moist and crumple when It is not crucial to pinpoint the exact number on 
squeezed in your hand. At the brittle end, dead the brittleness scale. What is important is to de-
leaves and stems are brittle, dry, and shatter termine where you are approximately so you can 
when squeezed in your hand. ensure that the actions you take to improve your 

land produce the results you intend. 
The brittleness scale is not about the quantity of 
precipitation that falls but the constancy of hu- SOMETHING TO OBSERVE
midity at the soil surface. If you have dry and wet Think about where you live, the level of humidity 
seasons, then both humidity and precipitation in the air, and how it is distributed throughout 
are seasonal and the environment is brittle—the the year. Think about how long it takes vegeta-
briefer the periods of humidity and/or the more tion to break down. For example, when you look 
erratic, the more brittle it is. When humidity is around, do you see moss growing on brick build-
present year round, the environment would be ings, recently fallen logs already partially de-
nonbrittle. The longer and more stable the peri- cayed, living organisms moving about on the soil 
od of humidity, the less brittle the environment. surface, etc.? All of these are signs of a nonbrittle 
In nonbrittle environments decay occurs rapid- environment.
ly, whether or not large herbivores are present. On the other hand, perhaps you see tall stands 
Decay in these environments is achieved bio- of dead, gray-colored grass, logs that have been 
logically through the activities of billions of small lying in the same place for years but have not 
organisms—from bacteria, molds and fungi to changed significantly in appearance, large bare 
insects in high populations — which thrive in the spaces between plants, etc. These observations 
year-round humidity. indicate a brittle environment. 
In brittle environments decay is much slower Based on the brittleness scale, would you say 
and almost always needs large herding animals you live in a nonbrittle (1–3), or less brittle (4–6) 
to facilitate decomposition by getting plant ma- or very brittle (7–10) environment? Remember, 
terials in contact with the soil surface through the extremes are: 1 = Rainforest and 10 = True 
tromping and dunging. Regardless of atmo- Desert.
spheric humidity these large herding animals 
maintain a constant internal humidity in their 
gut. Here they sustain very high populations 
of microorganisms capable of processing ma-
ture, fiber-rich plant material, such as seasonally 
dormant or dead grasses, that grow vigorously 
during the growing season, and stop when the 
rainfall ceases.

Worldwide, more than 60 percent of environ-
ments are brittle to some degree. Some low-rain-
fall environments are quite low on the brittle-
ness scale, because humidity is present through 
most of the year. Conversely, some high-rainfall 

p.10



THIRD KEY INSIGHT 
The predator-prey connection and land 
health in brittle environments
During his time as a wildlife biologist in Africa, Al-
lan Savory watched the movements of large herds 
of game animals. He noticed how they behaved 
when a predator was in the area—they bunched 
together for safety and milled around, trampling 
the plants and soil beneath them. In that process, 
they broke up the soil, trampled down old, gray 
stems and leaves, scattered seeds and covered 
them over with soil, dung and urine. They essen-
tially returned dead plant parts to the soil surface 
where they could decay and helped plant new 
grasses, simply by their behavior. In addition, the 
microorganisms missing from the soil surface in 
brittle environment dry or dormant seasons could 
be found in the stomachs of the herding animals. 

Thus, the third key insight was that in brittle envi-
ronments, relatively high numbers of large, herding 
animals concentrated and moving as they naturally 
do when pack-hunting predators are present, are 
vital to maintaining the health of the grasslands 
we once thought they destroyed.

In practice, herding animals may also have a role 
to play in maintaining nonbrittle grasslands as 
well. The predator-prey connection maintained FOURTH KEY INSIGHT
vast regions of brittle environment grasslands Time rather than numbers governs 
in sound condition for millions of years. Humans overgrazing and over-trampling
broke this connection when they removed the 
predators and caused the behavior of their herd- A common belief throughout the world is that 
ing prey to change: herds relaxed and spread out; overgrazing and over-trampling, and the land 
unbunched, the animal hooves no longer trampled destruction that ensues, is caused by the pres-
down plants or chipped and aerated soil surfac- ence of too many animals, and virtually all land 
es. Land health and productivity began to decline, improvement schemes call for the reduction or 
often rapidly. Using Holistic Planned Grazing, we removal of animals. Allan Savory also accepted 
can now manage livestock in a way that mimics this common wisdom, but later found too many 
the behavior produced by the predator-prey rela- situations where it didn’t seem to apply or didn’t 
tionship and begin to restore the grasslands. make sense. Why, for example, was some of 

the healthiest most productive land located in 
the areas where wildlife herds were enormous? 
Why was some of the worst land degradation 
occurring in protected research plots and pre-
serves where no herds were present?

p.11



The research of French pasture specialist Andre ing animals and their predators in maintaining the 
Voisin provided a vital clue. He had established health of the more brittle environments, showed 
that overgrazing bore little relationship to the why these environments were prone to deserti-
number of animals but was based instead on the fication. And the discovery that overgrazing and 
time plants were exposed to the animals. If ani- over-trampling were not a result of too many an-
mals remained in any one place for too long or if imals, but rather how long plants and soils were 
they returned to it before plants had recovered, exposed and re-exposed to them, led to the de-
they overgrazed plants. Savory realized that the velopment of a grazing planning procedure that 
same held true for trampling. The disturbance enabled us to use concentrated livestock, con-
needed for the health of the soil became an evil stantly moving, to provide the same benefits to 
if prolonged too much or repeated too soon. plants and soils once provided by wild herds.

So how had time figured in the grazing and 

CYCLE      
                                  

trampling of the vast wild herds of the past?  MINE
Savory reasoned that animals that bunch close-
ly to ward off predators also dung and urinate 
in high concentration and thus foul the ground 
and plants on which they are feeding. No ani-
mals normally like to feed on their own feces, as 
anyone who has kept and observed horses will 
know. Thus, to be able to feed on fresh plants 
the herds had to keep moving off the areas they 
had fouled. And they could not, ideally, return 
to the fouled area until the dung and urine had 
weathered and worn off. This meant that plants 
and soils would have been exposed to massive 
disturbance in the form of grazing, trampling, 
dunging and urinating, but only for a day or so, THE FOUR ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES
followed by a period of time which gave the soil 
and plants an opportunity to recover. Nurturing our Planet 

Overgrazing of plants and Through Holistic 
damage from trampling had  Management
less to do with the number ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES: 
of animals on the land, and UNDERSTANDING THE LANGUAGE 

more to do with the amount of OF THE LAND
time the plants and soils were With your knowledge of the four key insights, 

exposed to animals. you are beginning to understand the ways in 
which nature functions. In ebook #2 we look at 

Together the last three insights provide an ex- the four fundamental processes at work in na-
planation for why so many environments have ture—water cycle, mineral cycle, community dy-
continued to deteriorate under human manage- namics, and energy flow—so you can begin to 
ment and how we can rectify this. The discovery assess the health of the land.
of the brittleness scale and the vital role of herd-

p.12

          WATE
NITY

 DY
NAM

ICS

R GY FLOW          
                     COMMU

RAL C
YCL

E                                ENER



As you learn more about these processes, you 
will quickly discover that the earliest indicator of 
overall ecosystem health is soil cover. If soil is 
covered in living plants and decaying plant litter, 
the ecosystem processes will likely be function-
ing well. If soil is bare, including between plants, 
all four processes are likely to be malfunctioning.

Many people will focus on a certain species of 
plant or animal as an indicator of ecosystem 
health, wanting a noxious weed gone or a cer-
tain animal species to dominate the landscape. 
With Holistic Management, our first priority is to 
cover the soil and keep it covered year-round.

TOOLS FOR MANAGING  
ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES
As ebook #3 explains, we have four categories 
of tools to consider: technology, the first and 
most used tool; fire, the most ancient tool; rest, 
the most misunderstood tool; and living organ-
isms, the biological tools, which now include 
animal impact (for regenerating soils and shap-
ing landscapes) and grazing (for enhancing soil, 
plant and animal health and productivity). How-
ever, none of these tools can be applied except 
through the use of human creativity, money and 
labor.

When people think of tools they usually think in 
terms of technology and the many forms avail-
able: computers, machinery, equipment, etc. But 
with Holistic Management, when we refer to 
tools we mean all of the categories listed above. 
Wherever you are on the planet, every manage-
ment action you take will involve at least one 
of the three primary tools of human creativity, 
money, and labor, and one or more of the sec-
ondary tools of technology, fire, rest, and living 
organisms.

Until recently, people have not recognized ani-
mal impact and grazing as biological tools that 
can significantly influence the healthy function-
ing of ecosystem processes—probably because 
for centuries humans have vilified livestock for 

p.13



causing those processes to malfunction. Fire is HOLISTIC CONTEXT: CREATING THE 
often considered natural, but no fire lit by a hu- CONTEXT FOR YOUR MANAGEMENT
man is natural, nor is resting land from any form The decision makers identified in the whole you 
of disturbance (such as that provided by livestock) have just described now create one all-embrac-
natural. However, no tool should be regarded as ing holistic context (covered in detail in ebook 
good or bad, outside the context of the whole #4). You will refer to it often when making day-
you are managing. Only when the holistic con- to-day management decisions, and when de-
text (covered in the next section) and the degree veloping strategies that have traditionally been 
of brittleness are known can we begin to judge framed within a much narrower context. It has 
whether a particular tool is suitable or unsuitable two aspects:
in that particular situation, at that time.

•	 Quality of life—an expression of the way you 

Core Components of want your lives to be within the whole under 
management.

Holistic Management •	 Future resource base—a description of the 
environment and behaviors that will sustain 

WHOLE UNDER MANAGEMENT: that quality of life for your successors.
CLARIFYING WHAT YOU ARE 
MANAGING If you are managing an organization formed 

for a specific purpose, then prior to creat-
Key to understanding holistic decision mak- ing your holistic context, state that purpose 
ing is remembering the first insight: the world because it will inform the holistic context 
functions in wholes. Each of us is responsible and your management.
for managing at least one whole—ourselves as 
individuals. And beyond that first whole, there ACTIONS AND DECISION MAKING: 
may be several larger wholes—a farm, a fam- SELECTING APPROPRIATE TOOLS  
ily, or a business. As ebook #4 explains, when AND ACTIONS
clarifying the whole you are managing, there are As you move forward with management you 
three key things you need to identify: will create many plans involving a variety of 
•	 The decision makers—those directly involved goals and objectives and the tactics, strategies 

in its management. and policies for achieving them. Just as before, 
the actions you plan will address your immedi-

•	 The resource base, which refers to the phys- ate needs or desires for improving your lives or 
ical resources—land, buildings, equipment, your business, and for addressing any problems 
and other assets—from which you will gen- that stand in the way. But, in doing so your ho-
erate revenue or derive support, plus the listic context reminds you to not lose sight of 
people who influence or are influenced by what is meaningful to you in both the short and 
your management. long term. It will lead to the inclusion of what 

•	 The money available or that you can gener- you plan to do to create the quality of life your 
ate from the resource base. holistic context describes and the environment 

Knowing who and what your whole includes and behaviors that will sustain it. This generally 
helps you determine who makes management necessitates considerable thought, assessment 
decisions, who merely influences the decisions of current actions and development of plans to 
made, and it helps put boundaries around what achieve yet further goals that will bring about the 
you will or will not be managing. lives you desire and, if an organization, to meet 

your stated purpose. 

p.14



You decide which actions to take and tools to use every continent there are widespread examples 
to achieve your goals and objectives based on the of desertified and desertifying land, suggesting 
same commonsense criteria you’ve always used: something serious has been amiss. It also sug-
past experience, expert advice, research results, gests that after such a long time, some of the 
cultural norms, peer pressure, expediency, com- problems might be predictable if things were 
promise, cost, cash flow, profitability, intuition, laws viewed through a different lens. The context 
and regulations, and so on. Then you run the actions checks are such a lens. 
you plan to take through seven checking questions 
to ensure they are in line with your holistic context. The context checks are a quick and simple exer-

cise that helps ensure your actions are ecolog-
CONTEXT CHECKS: USING THE ically, financially and socially sound relative to 
SEVEN CHECKING QUESTIONS your holistic context. They help bring out both 
As ebook #5 explains, once you have selected the short- and long-term consequences stem-
which actions are best to take, you now pose a ming from your actions, which is helpful since 
series of questions to filter out actions that might we all have experienced adverse effects from 
not be in context, and thus not socially, environ- actions that seemed like a good idea at the time.
mentally and economically sound both short and 
long-term. FEEDBACK LOOP:  

MONITORING PROACTIVELY
In brief, the questions are: 

•	 Does this action address the root cause of 
the problem? PLAN

(ASSUME WRONG) MONITOR
•	 The weakest link in the situation? 
•	 Does it provide a greater return, in terms 

of time and money spent, than other 
possible actions? THE  

•	 Which of two or more possible enterprises FEEDBACK 
LOOP

provides the best gross profit (if choosing 
among enterprises)? 

•	 Is the energy or money to be used in this REPLAN
action derived from the most appropriate CONTROL
source, and will it be used in the most appro-
priate way, based on the holistic context? 

•	 Will this action lead toward or away from the 
future resource base described in the holistic In Holistic Management the word plan has become 
context? a 24‑letter word: plan‑monitor‑control‑replan. 

•	 Finally, based on the picture that has emerged, In the illustration, these words are incorporated 
how do you feel about this action now into a loop because planning is not an event but 
–how will it affect your quality of life and that a continuous process. Once a plan is made, you 
of others? need to monitor what happens from the outset 

Rarely do farmers, ranchers, pastoralists, and because unforeseen circumstances always lie 
landscape managers deliberately degrade their ahead. When the feedback from your monitor-
land. Every generation genuinely believes it is ing indicates the plan or action is causing you to 
doing the best it can. Unfortunately though, on deviate from the goal or objective you’re trying 

p.15



to reach, you must act to control the deviation. In each case, the earlier you detect signs of 
Occasionally events go beyond your control and change the easier it is to remain on track. If, for 
there is a need to replan. The better you control instance, your holistic context includes quality 
the plan the less you have to replan. (See Chap- time with family and you have planned a regu-
ter 44 in Holistic Management, Third Edition, lar activity each month, have you put the dates 
for details). in your calendar? Monitoring the quality of your 

relationships often comes down to monitoring 
If an action, or a plan outlining several actions behavior. The earliest signs of trouble may be 
attempts to alter ecosystem processes in some reflected in a change in attitude (e.g. loss of en-
way, then, despite having done your best to se- thusiasm) and in body language (e.g. avoiding 
lect the right action or strategy and checked to eye contact). You would never assume your ex-
ensure that it was in line with your holistic con- pectations of the person’s behavior are wrong, 
text, you assume from the outset that, given na- you would want to assume they are right for the 
ture’s complexity, you could be wrong. Then you obvious reason that positive (and higher) expec-
monitor, on the assumption you are wrong, for tations lead to enhanced performance.
the earliest possible warnings so you can con-
trol or correct the situation before any damage is When managing holistically you are not monitoring 
done. This keeps management proactive rather to see what happens; you are monitoring to make 
than reactive or adaptive. happen what you want to happen — to bring about 

changes in line with your holistic context. 
This proactive monitoring also applies in finan-
cial planning and to actions or decisions in-
volving quality of life and human behavior. In The word plan is actually a 
monitoring a financial plan, the key principle is 24-letter word:  
to control deviations within each income or ex- Plan-Monitor-Control-Replan
pense category and not simply allow deviations 
between them to balance out. Many people note 
any differences in income and expense projec- Planning and  
tions each month and control their plan based 
on overall figures. As long as the bottom line Monitoring Procedures 
comes out all right, all is well. But this leads to Holistic Management has evolved and been re-
sloppy management and often frequent replan- fined through nearly 50 years of observation, 
ning. Treat each income or expense category practice, and trial and error. It has been used by 
separately and control within each category and tens of thousands of farmers, ranchers, small 
you will keep control of your plan. businesses and non-profit organizations, fami-

lies and individuals—all with the aim of helping 
In day-to-day management it is important to people make management decisions that are so-
continually monitor the following: cially, environmentally, and economically sound. 
•	 Your planned actions for creating the quality The following planning and monitoring proce-

of life your holistic context describes. dures were developed because Holistic Man-
•	 The quality of your relationships with the agement enabled us to depart from conventional 

people in your resource base whose loyalty, practice in key ways. Holistic Financial Planning 
respect and support you need. includes refinements to the best of conventional 

financial planning specifically applicable to ag-
riculture. Holistic Land Planning enables us to 
effectively and economically plan (and/or replan) 

p.16



the infrastructure on large tracts of land that 2.	 Check for holistic context alignment. Which 
livestock will graze. The Holistic Planned Graz- actions are actually moving you in the direc-
ing procedure is essential for planning livestock tion you want to go—as you have indicated 
moves to restore degraded land to health while in your holistic context? The context checks 
keeping livestock healthy and productive and in- make sure we prioritize those actions that do 
tegrating crop and wildlife production and other move us in that direction while ensuring we 
land uses. achieve a healthy triple bottom line (financial, 

environmental, social).
Two additional processes are covered in the 
Holistic Management textbook: Holistic Policy The planning process includes two parts. The 
Development enables us to reframe policies cre- first is devoted to reviewing the current year’s 
ated in the context of a problem to ones devel- plan, gathering information and figures for the 
oped within a holistic context to better ensure new plan, and running decisions through the 
their success; and Holistic Research Orientation context checks. The information you gather 
helps us design research projects that meet the should include answers to the following ques-
needs of management, including the filling in of tions:
critical knowledge gaps.

BUILDING WEALTH
Holistic Financial Planning:  
Generating lasting wealth 
Good financial management is essential in any 
business that seeks to be viable and profitable. 
Agricultural producers have an additional re-
quirement and that is to ensure that the means 
to achieving viability and profit also generate eco-
logical wealth. By integrating this simple-to-use, 
cash-based financial planning process into your 
current accounting or budgeting systems, you will 
not only be able to increase your profit, but also 
improve your quality of life and your land’s health Photo by Andrea Malmberg

and productivity.
•	 Is there anything blocking the business as 

Holistic Financial Planning, covered more fully in a whole from making progress toward its 
ebooks #6 and #7, was developed specifically goals? If so, how will you address this ‘log-
for agricultural businesses, but it can and has jam’?
provided useful insights and benefits when ad-
opted by other businesses. Two key principles •	 Are there other factors adversely affecting 
in Holistic Financial Planning differentiate it from the business as a whole in terms of produc-
other methods: tivity and efficiency?

•	 Are current enterprises profitable and have 
1.	 Plan profit before planning expenses. Just you spread your risk?

as work expands to fill the time available, so •	 What is the weak link in each enterprise and 
expenses often rise to the level of anticipated how will you address it?
income. By planning profit first, we overcome 
this tendency.

p.17



When you have completed this first part of the To plan those moves, you need to divide your 
planning you will have identified all sources of land into paddocks (also referred to as pastures, 
income and estimated the amounts, confirmed camps, and a variety of other names). These can 
which enterprises are contributing the most to be ‘virtual’ paddocks in cases where fencing is 
covering the overhead of the business, which not aligned with your holistic context and herd-
enterprises you will run in the coming year and ing is used to control animal movements. In oth-
what they will cost to run, and identified ways er contexts, paddocks are generally demarcated 
you can cut expenses while maintaining the in- with fencing—temporary or permanent fence, a 
tegrity of the business and your quality of life. single electric wire, or electric netting (for more 

challenging species to manage, like goats) or a 
All of the thinking, decision checking, and sort- combination of all of the above.
ing of the information you compile, then comes 
into play in the second part when you put your 
plan on a spreadsheet. If you’ve done the first The primary focus of the 
part well and researched the income and costs grazing planning is on getting 
involved in the ideas you want to implement, livestock moves right
you probably won’t need more than a day or two 
to put your plan on paper. The bulk of your time Planning the layout of new paddocks is some-
will be spent in planning the income and then thing we do as part of Holistic Land Planning 
preventing expenses from rising to equal it. This (covered next), but having the ideal layout in 
may involve considerable adjustment as you pri- place is not necessary before implementing Ho-
oritize the expenses that will have money allo- listic Planned Grazing. You can start with what 
cated to them, make sure the plan cash flows, you have. Just measure the sizes of existing 
and that any borrowing you plan to do, or debt paddocks and note where water is available and 
you already have incurred, can be serviced. how much, as you will likely be running animals 

in larger herds that require more water.
LAND AND LIVESTOCK 
MANAGEMENT The grazing planning procedure enables any 
Holistic Planned Grazing:  farmer, rancher, or pastoralist to produce the 
Getting animals to the right place,  best possible plan at any time by adding value to 
at the right time, with the right behavior the knowledge he or she invariably has already 
If livestock are included in the whole you are in his or her head. It is an extremely effective 
managing Holistic Planned Grazing is a key way of addressing the full complexity involved 
practice to incorporate into your management. It when managing soil, plants, animals, and inte-
enables you to plan livestock moves and a host grating the animals with any other activities on 
of other factors that will prove key to your suc- that land. 
cess—financially, environmentally and socially. Most people cannot deal with more than a few 
Ebook #8 covers the fundamentals of Holistic variables at once and none can plan the com-
Planned Grazing and ebook #9 the instructions plexity involved in managing livestock to regen-
for creating your grazing plan. Decisions such as erate grasslands and livelihoods using only their 
what species and class of livestock you run, how memory, a notebook, or calendar. So the plan-
many, and so on, will be determined as you do ning is done following simple steps in a specific 
your financial planning each year. The primary order. Every possible consideration is addressed 
focus of the grazing planning is on getting live- one by one in the steps and recorded on the 
stock moves right. grazing chart until a clear picture emerges of 

p.18



where the animals should and should not be 
at certain times. The moves of the animals are 
then plotted, to ensure that animals are where 
they need to be at the right time, and with the 
right behavior (based on what you are trying to 
achieve).

Holistic Planned Grazing has been used for over 
50 years in a variety of situations—from the 
margins of true deserts with almost no rainfall to 
tropical forests with abundant rainfall. The se-
cret to its success is nothing more than trusting 
the procedure, following it, and recognizing that 
it, like all planning is a continuous process—plan, 
monitor, control and replan.

Photo by Andrea Malmberg
The grazing planning  is usually done twice a 
year—at the onset of the growing season (grow-
ing season plan) and again when growth has 
slowed or stopped for the year (non-growing 
season plan). The growing season plan is called 
an open-ended plan because it is left open to-
ward the end of the growing season, as you 
don’t know when growth will slow or end. The 
non-growing season plan is called a closed plan 
because it is carried through to a specific end 
date—a month or more after growth is normally 
expected to begin in the following season. This 
additional ‘month or more’ becomes the drought 
reserve. In brittle environments you assume ev-
ery year is going to be a drought, or a long, hard 
winter. 

The main aim of the growing season plan is to 
grow the maximum amount of forage possible. 
The aim of the non-growing season plan is to 
ration out the forage you have grown so that 
it feeds both livestock and wildlife until new 
growth occurs. 

Holistic Land Planning: Designing the ideal 
layout of facilities for a grazing operation 
Holistic Planned Grazing and Holistic Land Plan-
ning were developed in tandem in the 1960s 
when Allan Savory first understood the role of 
time in grazing and trampling. He knew that an- An example of a Holistic Grazing Plan for a Ranch in 

Sonora Mexico.

p.19



imals would have to move continually, but to do than cost money,’ literally generating the capi-
that required new thinking about the way fenc- tal from the land. Holistic Financial Planning and 
ing, water points, roads, and handling facilities the context checks will help you do this. For in-
were laid out—even more so when dealing with stance, if energy conversion is the weak link in 
large tracts of land that require a considerable your chain of production this year, then building 
investment in infrastructure and/or labor. fence makes sense. But no two new fences can 

possibly result in the same increased income, 
Most farms and ranches with livestock already so you determine which one to add first based 
have considerable infrastructure (roads, build- on marginal reaction per dollar, to generate the 
ings, dams, crop fields, etc.). Generally this was income for the next. It can take many years to 
developed using cost-conscious common sense implement your plan completely. 
and in the belief that different vegetation and 
soil types needed to be separated in the fencing You can design your ideal plan at any time. Be-
layout. Moreover, on large properties, existing cause the costs are almost entirely time, pencil, 
water points heavily influenced any fencing de- and paper (or consulting internet resources such 
velopment. as Google Earth), and because the final results 

can change the entire economic situation, the 
Two things changed this. One was the lowered earlier it is done the better. In some cases, your 
cost of piping with the advent of PVC pipe. A holistic land plan might even suggest little im-
greater one was the realization that vegetation provement on the inherited design but at least 
and soil types did not need to be separated be- that is confirmed before further development 
cause livestock under planned grazing have the takes place. 
same beneficial effect on soil and vegetation if 
adequate recovery time is planned for plants and Holistic Ecological Monitoring:  
soils. As a result, greater consideration could be To keep your land management on track
given to economic factors—reducing road travel, Monitoring changes on the land occurs at three 
and the capital and running costs of an opera- levels. First, it is important to cultivate a general 
tion. and ongoing awareness of the condition of the 
Holistic Land Planning, covered in detail in eb- four ecosystem processes (water cycle, mineral 
ooks #10 and #11, uses several copies of a cycle, energy flow, and community dynamics), 
‘blank’ map that includes only contour lines the subject of ebook #2. Second, if you are man-
and absolutely fixed features, in brainstorming aging livestock, you must also monitor growth 
all the possible layouts people can think of un- rates, water supplies, the development of unfa-
constrained by any existing movable feature or vorable grazing patterns, and so on, when work-
past infrastructure. From the many possibilities ing to a holistic grazing plan (covered in ebook 
that emerge the best is selected based on many #9). Third, monitoring your management of eco-
considerations—livestock, weather, capital and system processes anytime you try something 
running costs, other land uses, wildlife, conser- new and need to know its effects quickly, and 
vation goals and more. If through this you find annually, using the Holistic Ecological Monitor-
that a layout different from the one you inherited ing process, the subject of ebooks #12 and #13 
would eventually be better, adopt that one and to help you predict changes and trends.
gradually implement it. Early-warning Monitoring:  
Implementation (putting in new fences, water, Testing new ideas
roads, etc.) is generally best done over time and Because of nature’s complexity we must take 
only when the infrastructure would ‘earn rather the attitude that much of what we do as land 

p.20



managers may lead to unanticipated effects. end of the non-growing season. At this point in 
Anytime you are instituting a new practice, as- the year, the amount of bare ground is most vis-
sume you are wrong, even though the decision, ible and changes more easily measured. 
or decisions, involved have passed all the rele-
vant checks. Then monitor proactively, making Guidelines for Using  
adjustments quickly if your monitoring shows 
they are needed. Start with a clear idea of what the Management Tools
you want to achieve and then ask yourself, “If I The management guidelines reflect years of ex-
am wrong, at what point could I get the earliest perience in a variety of situations and will help 
possible indication?” That is the point you need shape your plans and actions. They are covered 
to monitor in the simplest way you can devise. in detail in Holistic Management, Third Edition 
Routine Ecological Monitoring:  (chapters referenced below) and summarized 
Predicting changes and trends here:
The Holistic Ecological Monitoring process fo- TOOL: FIRE
cuses on the soil surface and the life upon it, 
measuring changes in the four fundamental Burning
processes: water cycle, and the effectiveness of While fire is a tool that has a definite and use-
available precipitation; mineral cycle, and the cy- ful role to play in land management, we always 
cling of nutrients; energy flow, and the amount need to question its use. The burning guideline 
of life-sustaining solar energy captured; com- reminds us of the environmental dangers asso-
munity dynamics, and the direction of change in ciated with burning while providing appropriate 
the biological community. safeguards. (Chapter 36)

Ebook #13 includes both a basic and a compre- TOOL: LIVING ORGANISMS
hensive monitoring procedure. Both procedures 
have you gather and analyze data to determine Time
the effectiveness of the management tools used When the whole you are managing includes 
to create your desired landscape. The basic pro- grazing animals for any reason, you need to 
cedure requires minimal time and effort; the make sure that their presence enhances all four 
comprehensive procedure can take several days, ecosystem processes. Timing the exposure and 
but it provides ‘quantitative data’ that may be re-exposure of the plants and soils to the ani-
needed in collaborative management, or public mals will be critical to ensuring plants are not 
land situations. overgrazed or soils over-trampled. The guide-

lines for managing grazing and trampling time 
The best time to monitor depends on the envi- vary with the level of brittleness, the climate, the 
ronment and when it is easiest to get meaning- season, the types of plants, and the needs of the 
ful data about the most critical considerations. animals. (Chapter 33)
In many situations the most active part of the 
growing season is the best time to monitor. In Stock density and herd effect
others the end of the non-growing season is The stock density and herd effect guidelines ap-
best. In the latter case, if your goal is to move ply when you are using the tools of grazing and 
from annual to perennial grass communities and animal impact to alter soil conditions or vegeta-
you want to track decreases in bare soil and in- tion. The biggest challenge in inducing herd ef-
creases in perennial grasses, and you are in the fect, which requires that you produce behavior 
tropics, monitoring is often best done toward the change in the animals, is inducing it often enough 

p.21



and over a large enough area, particularly in the 
more brittle environments. (Chapter 34)

Population management
The population management guideline applies 
any time you want to encourage or discourage 
the success of a species. The guideline includes 
suggestions for assessing the health of a spe-
cies’ population, for determining the environ-
mental factors that will enhance or limit that 
population’s success, and for dealing with pred-
ators that become a problem. (Chapter 37)

Cropping
If we are to sustain our present civilization and 
its enormous population, we must strive to cre-
ate an agriculture that more closely mimics Na-
ture, one that enhances rather than diminishes 
water and mineral cycles, energy flow, and com-
munity dynamics. There are several fundamen-
tal guidelines that apply in any cropping situa-
tion (Chapter 35)

IMPLEMENTATION MASTERY
In addition to these management guidelines, 
implementation mastery in the context of a pri-
vate, commercial operation, or of a communal, 
subsistence operation, includes vocational skills 
related to low-stress livestock handling, herd-
ing, water development and maintenance, fence 
building and maintenance, related vehicle and 
equipment maintenance, crop production, small 
livestock production, and the like. 

Just as it takes years for someone to master any 
profession, whether it be carpentry, law, or med-
icine, properly managing livestock takes years of 
experience in pasture and rangeland-based live-
stock agriculture, crop production, or small live-
stock production to learn the skills necessary to 
manage these resources holistically. 

p.22



Holistic Management Framework
WHOLE UNDER MANAGEMENT

Decision Makers  —  Resource Base  —  Money

HOLISTIC CONTEXT

(Statement of Purpose)  —  Quality of Life  —  Future Resource Base

ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES

Water Cycle Mineral Cycle Community Dynamics Energy Flow

ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT TOOLS

Living Organisms
Human Creativity Technology Fire Rest • Animal Impact Money & Labor

• Grazing

ACTIONS AND DECISION MAKING

Objectives, Goals, Tactics, Strategies, Policies
Customary Selection Criteria (past experience, expert advice, research, etc.)

CONTEXT CHECKS

Cause & Weak Link Marginal Gross Energy Sustainability Gut Feel
Effect • Social Reaction Profit Money 

• Biological Analysis Source 
• Financial Use

MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES

Time Stock Density Cropping Burning Population 
& Herd Effect Management

PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES FEEDBACK LOOP
Holistic Financial Holistic Land 

Planning Planning PLAN
(ASSUME WRONG) MONITOR

Holistic Planned Holistic Policy 
Grazing Development THE  

FEEDBACK 
LOOP

Holistic Research 
Orientation REPLAN

CONTROL

p.23



Glossary for many years); (4) very slow development 
of communities from bare soil surfaces unless 

ANIMAL IMPACT  The sum total of the physically disturbed; and (5) algae and lichen 
direct physical influences animals have on the covering soil surfaces for centuries unless ad-
land—trampling, digging, dunging, urinating, equately disturbed. In such environments it is 
salivating, rubbing, and so on. Most commonly very easy to produce millions of acres where 
achieved with herding animals in high the ground between plants is bare or algae- or 
concentration. The larger the herd,  the greater lichen-capped, merely by resting the land ex-
the effect. cessively, burning it frequently, or overgrazing 

many grass plants. Such areas tend to maintain 
BIODIVERSITY  The diversity of species biodiversity and stability only when they receive 
and their genetic material and the age structure adequate disturbance periodically.
of their populations within a given community.

COMMUNITY DYNAMICS  The 
BRITTLENESS SCALE  All terrestrial development of communities of living 
environments, regardless of total rainfall, fall organisms. This process is ongoing due to 
somewhere along a continuum from nonbrittle the constant interplay of species, changing 
to very brittle. For simplicity, we refer to composition, and changing microenvironment. 
this continuum as a 10-point scale, 1 being However, the greater the biodiversity within 
nonbrittle and 10 being very brittle. a community, the more complex, and thus the 
Completely nonbrittle environments are charac- more stable, it tends to be.
terized by (1) reliable precipitation, regardless 
of volume; (2) good distribution of humidity DESERTIFICATION  A process 
throughout the year as a whole; (3) a high rate characterized by a loss of biodiversity, plant 
of biological decay in dead plant material, which mass, and soil cover. Symptoms include 
is most rapid close to the soil surface (thus, increased incidence of flood and drought, 
dead trees rot at their bases and topple over declining levels of soil organic matter, increased 
relatively quickly); (4) speedy development of soil surface exposure, and soil erosion.
new communities on any bare surface; and (5) ENERGY FLOW  The flow of energy from 
the development of complex and stable com- the sun to green growing plants, which convert 
munities even where they are not physically the energy (through photosynthesis) to the food 
disturbed for many years. In such environments that fuels all life. Sunlight energy does not cycle, 
it is virtually impossible to produce or maintain it is a one-way flow through our ecosystem.
millions of acres where the ground between 
plants is bare, other than on croplands that are HOLISTIC PLANNED GRAZING  The 
continually exposed by machinery. planning of livestock moves, using a step-by-

step planning guide and a grazing chart, that 
Very brittle environments, on the other hand, enables managers to deal with a great degree 
are characterized by: (1) unreliable precipitation, of complexity. The planning enables you to 
regardless of volume; (2) poor distribution of integrate any type of grazing livestock—taking 
humidity through the year as a whole; (3) the into account their behavior and their time on 
chemical (oxidizing) and physical (weathering) or off any unit of land—with other land users 
breakdown of dead plant material, general- and uses (wildlife, cropping, forestry, etc.) while 
ly slowly and from the upper parts of plants catering for many variables, issues or problems, 
downward (thus, dead trees remain standing such as droughts. Holistic Planned Grazing is 

p.24



suited to all environments, to any size of farm, litter, rather than living plants, provides most of 
ranch, or pastoral grazing area, and with or the soil cover in brittle environments.
without fencing. WATER CYCLE  The movement of water 
MINERAL CYCLE  The cycling of mineral from the atmosphere to the soil (or the oceans) 
nutrients from soil to aboveground plants and and eventually back to the atmosphere. An 
animals and back to the soil again. A healthy effective water cycle is one in which plants 
and productive environment will promote the make maximum use of rainfall, little evaporates 
movement of minerals from deep soil layers to directly off the soil, and any runoff causes 
aboveground plants with a minimum of mineral no erosion and remains clear. Also a good 
loss from soil erosion or mineral leaching. air-to-water balance should exist in the soil, 

enabling plant roots to absorb water readily. 
OVERGRAZING  This occurs when a plant For the water cycle to be effective in brittle 
that has been bitten severely in the growing environments, the soil must be covered with 
season gets bitten severely again while using living plants or litter, as vast amounts of water 
energy it has taken from its crown, stem are lost through the bare, exposed soil between 
bases, or roots to reestablish leaf. Generally, plants.
this results in the eventual death of the plant. 
In intermediate stages it results in reduced 
production from the plant. Overgrazing 
commonly occurs at three different times: when 
the plant is exposed to the animals for too 
many days and they are around to re-graze it 
as it tries to regrow; when animals move away 
but return too soon and graze the plant again 
while it is still using stored energy to re-form 
leaf; and immediately following dormancy 
when the plant is growing new leaf from stored 
energy.

OVERREST  This occurs when a perennial 
grass plant has been rested so long that 
accumulating dead material prevents light from 
reaching growth points at the plant’s base, 
hampering new growth and eventually killing 
the plant. Overrest occurs mainly in brittle 
environments where, in the absence of large 
herbivores, most old material breaks down 
gradually through oxidation and weathering 
rather than rapidly through biological decay.

PLANT LITTER  Dead plant material—
leaves, stems, twigs, bark, needles—that has 
fallen or been trampled onto the ground. Plant 

p.25