EBOOK TWO

The Ecosystem 
Processes



Copyright © Savory Institute 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other elec-
tronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other 
noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to the 
publisher, addressed ‘Attention: Permissions Coordinator,’ at the address below.

Savory Institute
885 Arapahoe Ave,
Boulder, Colorado 80302, USA
contact@savory.global
http://savory.global



The Ecosystem Processes

Contents
 

ECOSYSTEM BASICS	 5
Four windows into the same room 5

 
WATER CYCLE	 6
The flow of water through plants and soils	 6
Effective water cycles	 8
How to create an effective water cycle	 9
Noneffective water cycles	 9

 
MINERAL CYCLE	 12
Maximizing the flow of nutrients through plants and soils	 12
Minerals to the surface	 12
Aboveground to surface	 13
Surface to underground	 15
The importance of the soil surface	 15
Good and poor mineral cycles	 16

 
COMMUNITY DYNAMICS	 17
The never-ending patterns in the development of biological communities	 17
Soil cover is key	 17
Nature’s wholes function at the community level	 18
Changes in biological communities	 18
Succession and the brittleness scale	 19
Management implications	 19



ENERGY FLOW	 20
Maximizing the flow of sunlight energy through our ecosystem	 20
The energy pyramid	 20
The energy tetrahedron	 22

Time—duration and rate of growth	 22
Density—of plants	 23
Area—of leaf	 23

 
HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK	 25
GLOSSARY	 26



Ecosystem Basics
CYCLE      

                                   MINE
We often talk of various ecosystems—a forest 
ecosystem, riparian ecosystem, grassland eco-
system, etc. However, in managing these eco-
systems many people forget that the boundaries 
that define them are an artificial distinction. A ri-
parian ecosystem, for instance, cannot be man-
aged separately from the grassland or forest eco-
system surrounding it, but in practice it often is. 
Each of these ecosystems only exists in dynam-
ic relationship to the other and as members of a 
greater ecosystem. Rather than distinguish lesser 
ecosystems within it, we will speak of different 
environments within one ecosystem all of which 
function through four fundamental processes:

1.	 Water Cycle: The movement of water from FOUR WINDOWS  
the atmosphere to the soil or oceans, where INTO THE SAME ROOM
it nourishes plant and animal life, and even- Another way to think about it is to view these 
tually back to the atmosphere. four processes as four separate windows looking 

2.	 Mineral Cycle: The movement of mineral nu- into the same room—you get four different 
trients from soil to plants and animals and perspectives of the same thing, our ecosystem. 
back to soil again. Through one window you view the water cycle, 

3.	 Community Dynamics (Succession): The through another, the mineral cycle, and so on.
ever-changing dynamics within a biological The way to gain a true understanding of how 
community. This process is ongoing due to well the ecosystem processes are functioning 
the constant interplay of species, changing on your land is to get out there and walk on it. 
composition and changing microenviron- Reading the land, watching for symptoms of a 
ment. noneffective water cycle, a poor mineral cycle, 

4.	 Energy Flow: The flow of energy from the poor energy flow, or a stagnant or out of balance 
sun to green growing plants, which convert biological community, is like diagnosing a dis-
the energy (through photosynthesis) to the ease. You must understand what a healthy eco-
food that fuels all life. system looks like and then be able to recognize 

If you were to consciously modify any one of the signs, symptoms or indicators of deteriorat-
these processes, you would automatically mod- ing health.
ify them all in some way because they are inter- The ecosystem processes are a vital element in 
related. the Holistic Management framework. The ho-

listic context—the guiding force behind holistic 
decision making—rests on the foundation of our 
ecosystem. When you begin to practice Holis-
tic Management you define the whole you are 
responsible for managing and then create a ho-
listic context. The holistic context describes how 

p.5

NITY
 DY

NAM
ICS           WATER 

GY FLOW          
                     COMMU

RAL C
YCL

E                                ENER



Evaporation from
water sources

Rainfall Transpiration

Runoff to rivers,
lakes and sea Surface

Evaporation

Retention
in soil

Penetration to deeper crevices and underground water reservoirs

Underground flow to springs, rivers, seas

you want your life to be and the landscape re-
quired to sustain that way of life for you and your Water Cycle
descendants. For the land manager, the land- THE FLOW OF WATER THROUGH 
scape description includes how the ecosystem PLANTS AND SOILS
processes must be functioning if that land is to 
sustain the way of life described in your holistic Water is a locally finite resource that constant-
context. ly cycles from the atmosphere to the earth and 

back to the atmosphere. The illustration above 
If you want to have healthy, thriving land, you shows the various paths taken by water falling 
have to be a keen observer of the world around on the land as rain, hail and snow. Some evap-
you and aware of how well water and mineral orates off soil and plant surfaces back into the 
cycles, community dynamics and energy flow atmosphere. Some runs off into streams, rivers, 
are functioning. Knowing this will help you mon- lakes, and eventually the sea before evaporat-
itor the results of the actions you take that af- ing. Some penetrates the soil and of that a por-
fect the land. The next four sections will describe tion sticks to soil particles.
each of the ecosystem processes in greater de-
tail, beginning with the water cycle. The rest flows through the ground to under-

ground reservoirs, or aquifers. There it may re-
main for millennia or find its way quickly back to 

p.6



the surface in river bank seepage, springs and CAPPING
bogs, or possibly through deep-rooted plants Capping results when raindrops fall on exposed 
that pick it up and transpire it back into the air. soil. The energy from the raindrop breaks crumb 
Of water held by soil particles, a small portion structure and frees fine soil particles, which in 
remains tightly held, but the bulk is either at- turn seal, or cap, the surface The soil cap inhib-
tracted to drier particles or drawn away by plant its water penetration and prevents oxygen get-
roots and transpired into the atmosphere. Thus, ting into the soil and carbon dioxide out. Any soil 
one way or another, all water constantly cycles that is exposed to raindrops will cap, even san-
between earth and air. dy soils. Recent capping refers to a soil that has 

capped with the last rainfall. Immature capping 
Any water that penetrates the soil will be strong- refers to capping that may have been broken in 
ly attracted to drier soil particles. The water will the past but is still strong enough to inhibit wa-
keep moving until all of it has adhered to soil ter penetration, aeration and seedling establish-
particles or passed on to underground reservoirs ment. Mature capping refers to a soil that has 
of free water. Plants absorb water, and essential remained capped long enough for algae/lichen 
nutrients dissolved in it, through root hairs. They or mosses to colonize the bare surface. Unless 
can do this as long as their ability to draw water disturbed, production will remain minimal and 
can overcome the grip on the water exercised by biodiversity may not be enhanced for decades.
dry soil particles. Drier particles yield less water 
than moist particles. Therefore, as soil dries, the 
plant slows its growth rate.

Eventually it begins to wilt in the heat of the day 
or curl its leaves to conserve moisture as its abil-
ity to obtain water from the soil is reduced. Much 
can be done, however, to retain more moisture in 

Covered soil indicates an effective water cycle.
the soil and thus extend the time during which 
plants can grow vigorously before wilting point 
is reached.

If the soil surface is covered with litter or closely 
spaced plants, it will retain more moisture and so 
will the soil particles below. When rain hits bare 
soil, the raindrop impact, when severe, displaces 
soil particles and can disrupt the soil structure 
moving small particles in between the large par- Capped bare soil results in an ineffective water cycle.  

ticles. This leads to a capped soil surface. (Texas, USA)

Capped bare soil in Patagonia, Argentina. The valuable and scarce 
precipitation will quickly evaporate from the surface or run off.

p.7



EFFECTIVE WATER CYCLES QUESTIONS TO ASK IN 
DETERMINING THE HEALTH OF  

To sustain the biodiversity in all but wetlands THE WATER CYCLE ON YOUR LAND
and true deserts, you need to maintain an 
effective water cycle in which: In most of your grassland, how wide is the 

plant spacing?
•	 little water is lost to runoff or evaporation 

from the soil As you look down between plants, how 
would you describe most of the soil surface:

•	 most water penetrates the soil, only subse-
quently leaving it through transpiring plants, •	 Covered with litter, or bare and exposed to 
by flowing down to underground reservoirs, rain and sun?
or out through rivers and streams. •	 Capped, sealed and impervious, or broken  

•	 a good air-to-water balance exists in the soil, and porous?
enabling plant roots to absorb water readily, As you look between plants on slopes do you 
as most plants require oxygen as well as wa- see little dams made of litter that has caught 

on plants and is leading to silt deposits 
ter around their roots to grow. behind each dam:

Most land managers know the average rainfall their •	 Do you see obvious signs of water movement 
land receives and manage accordingly. Unfortu- across the surface?
nately, the average rarely occurs, especially in brittle •	 Mostly plants with fine and narrow leaves or oth-
environments where precipitation can be distribut- er signs of moisture conservation?
ed erratically. An effective water cycle for your re-
gion tends to even out these imbalances because •	 Prevalence of microperennial grasses and or 

sedges in the grassland?
when land is healthy it absorbs rain effectively and 
can be used much more efficiently. Effective rain- •	 Prevalence of plants with thick cuticles (skin) like 

cacti?
fall is that which soaks in and becomes available to 
plant roots, insects and microorganisms, and then •	 Are most grass plants broad leafed and rapid 

moves downward to replenish underground water growing?

supplies. On healthy land, a smaller amount of water •	 Do you notice shortly after rain that grass plants 
runs off or evaporates off the soil surface compared are dark green and growing rapidly or not?

to less healthy land. 

Effective precipitation is 
that which soaks into the 

soil and becomes available 
to plant roots, insects and 

microorganisms, or replenishes 
underground supplies with 

very little evaporating from or 
running off the soil surface

p.8



HOW TO CREATE AN  •	 Soil surface is permeable, and the soil be-
EFFECTIVE WATER CYCLE neath the surface is well aerated.
To enter the soil, water must first penetrate the •	 Water runoff and evaporation losses off the 
soil surface—how deep will depend on the rate soil surface are minimized.
at which it is applied, the porosity of the soil sur- •	 Seepage into underground aquifers is higher.
face, and the soil texture (for example, amount of •	 The organic content of the soil is high.
clay). Management tools that increase vegetative •	 Transpiration by plants is high, and faster 
cover and increase the soil’s organic matter will growth rates are achievable.
slow the flow of water, which allows more to soak 
in before running off, and will increase infiltration. •	 Effects of droughts and floods are less severe. 
It should be noted however that there are some A covered soil surface is critical to creating 
wildlife species that require high amounts of bare and maintaining an effective water cycle.
ground. For instance, the mountain plover, a rare 
North American grassland bird, is most success- NONEFFECTIVE WATER CYCLES
ful nesting in areas with large amounts of bare When you have a noneffective water cycle, 
ground such as prairie dog colonies. drought effects are much more severe because 

more water is lost to evaporation or runoff. 
Still, more than any other single factor, an ef- Good plant growth may occur, but only in short 
fective water cycle requires management that bursts, often a few days after a rain compared 
maintains or increases soil cover, followed by the to areas with effective water cycles. Soon after 
buildup of organic matter, aeration, and infiltra- this growth spurt, the plants begin to wilt and 
tion. growth is halted until the next rainfall. Plants start 
When you have an effective water cycle and growing later in a season since moisture from 
healthy vegetative community, the effects of the previous year and over the winter has not 
floods and droughts become less severe, even been stored in the soil. Rangelands and pastures 
where rainfall is very erratic. The floods that do produce far less forage and on croplands, crop 
occur—as often happens with very high rain- yields are much less than they could be.
fall years or rapid snowmelt—tend to rise more When rainfall is high or snow melts rapidly, 
gradually and subside more slowly. The flood- floods often occur; but when you have a nonef-
waters tend to be clearer because they carry far fective water cycle, they are much more severe. 
less soil and debris. This is particularly true when there are large ar-
The effects of droughts that do occur—as they eas of land where the ground is bare. The greater 
will when there is little or no rainfall in the grow- the amount of bare ground, the higher the rate of 
ing reason—are far less severe because more water runoff. Bare soil can shed more than half 
moisture penetrates the soil more readily and the water falling on it. That is a lot of water that 
is retained. In general, an effective water cycle could be available for wildlife, human and agri-
will ensure that far more water is available over cultural purposes.
a longer period of time for plant growth. Equally alarming is the amount of water lost 
Healthy land that has an effective water cycle through evaporation from a bare soil surface. It 
has the following characteristics compared to can be as high as 90 percent. Unfortunately, not 
less healthy land: a lot of attention is paid to soil surface evapo-

ration. This is particularly true in brittle environ-
ments, where a significant amount is bare be-
tween plants. Regardless of the environment, a 

p.9



noneffective water cycle has the following char- YOU DO THE MATH
acteristics compared to areas with an effective 
water cycle: While even the healthiest land will not likely 

infiltrate all precipitation if you have a downpour 
•	 Soil surface is exposed, sealed, or capped, or extremely fast thaw, this simple exercise 

and the soil beneath the surface is more shows the power that land managers have if they 
compacted—both greatly reducing aeration. do improve the water cycle.

•	 Water runoff is higher and evaporation loss-
es are higher through exposed soil surfaces. If 30 inches of rain were to fall on one acre of 

•	 Decreased water infiltration and increased land, that would total 814,625 gallons of water. 
losses through evaporation from exposed soil If a quarter of that water runs off, that is 200,000 
surfaces increase the severity of droughts, gallons of water running off one acre of bare soil. 
particularly in more arid environments. If you multiply that figure by a million acres, the 

total amount of water running off would be over 
•	 Underground water supplies are diminished 200 billion gallons.

because water runs off or evaporates from 
the soil surface rather than seeping under- If you want to go metric, then remember this 
ground and into aquifers. simple formula: if 1 mm of rain falls on 1 square 

•	 There is lower organic content in the soil and meter of land that would total 1 liter of water. Thus, 
thus poor aeration. a 10,000-hectare ranch that only gets 250 mm 

•	 Plant growth rates are slower in all condi- (10 inches) of rain would get a total of 2,500,000 
tions, which leads to reduced production. liters of water per hectare (10,000 square meters 

per hectare x 250 mm = 2,500,000). 
CONCLUSION That amount multiplied by 10,000 hectares is a 
If your biological community is not as productive as great deal of water, as long as you keep it in the 
it potentially could be due to significant amounts soil to grow plants and replenish underground 
of bare ground, you know the water cycle is not water sources!
effective. In terms of your holistic context, you 
will in most cases want to describe what the land 
looks like when the water cycle is effective.

p.10



A LAST LOOK AT EFFECTIVE AND NONEFFECTIVE WATER CYCLES

EFFECTIVE NONEFFECTIVE
WATER CYCLE WATER CYCLE

Low Soil surface runoff High

Low Soil surface evaporation High

Low Salinization1    High

Low Drought incidence High

Low Flood incidence High

High Transpiration by plants Low

High Seepage to underground reservoirs Low

High Effectiveness of precipitation Low
1 Soil water contains dissolved mineral salts. When the water is sucked upwards through the capillary action initiated by a bare, dry soil surface, 
only the water will evaporate, leaving the salts behind. This is called salinization.

p.11



Mineral Cycle aboveground by plants and animals, they must 
be returned underground through decomposi-

MAXIMIZING THE CYCLE  tion. In the soil they will be held in the active root 
OF NUTRIENTS THROUGH  zones until used again or migrate down to deep-
PLANTS AND SOILS er depths.
Like water, minerals and other nutrients follow a Plants need many minerals and nutrients for 
cyclical pattern as they are used and reused by growth. Carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and 
different organisms. Unlike the water cycle, how- many of the micronutrients are obtained either 
ever, it is much more difficult to see minerals in from the atmosphere or from the soil. The most 
motion; we can watch water flow, soak in, and common nutrients are carbon and nitrogen. Cy-
run off, but we cannot do the same with nutrients cling of many minerals closely follows parts of 
as they cycle through the system. the carbon cycle.
It requires a different set of observational skills to 
watch for an effective, well-functioning mineral READING THE LAND
cycle. And, it is important to remember that the What do land managers look for in a good min-
mineral cycle does not operate independently of eral cycle? First and foremost, they look to see if 
the other three ecosystem processes. A water the soil is covered either by living plants or plant 
cycle is made more effective by a good mineral litter. In brittle environments, they are looking 
cycle that keeps plants healthy above- and be- at the breakdown of old vegetation and dung. 
low-ground. A mineral cycle is enhanced when It should be rapid. Gray grass leaves and stems 
you have an abundance and diversity of species indicate slow breakdown, as do hard, dry dung 
within the biological community, all of which tend pats. In non-brittle environments, breakdown is 
to thrive when you maximize energy flow. Re- generally rapid because of the year-round pres-
member, each of the four processes represents a ence of decaying organisms. In either environ-
window looking in on the same room, our eco- ment, land managers look for a mix of plants 
system. with varying root depths so that nutrients can 

be brought up from many layers: fibrous-root-
A good mineral cycle implies a biologically ac- ed grasses as well as the deeper-penetrating, 
tive, living soil, with adequate aeration and en- tap-rooted brush, forbs and trees. If the soil feels 
ergy underground to sustain an abundance of spongy when they walk across it, they know it is 
organisms that make up the soil foodweb (see porous and likely to be full of life.
diagram). Soil organisms need energy derived 
from sunlight, but often do not come up to the 
soil surface to get it for themselves. They de-
pend on a continuous supply of decomposing 
plant and animal residues to provide their en-
ergy needs.

In order to be most useful to humans, wild-
life, and livestock, mineral nutrients have to be 
brought aboveground by living plants. To gain 
maximum nutrient supplies in the active soil 
layers, minerals must continually be brought by 
plant roots and soil organisms to the surface 
from deeper soil layers. Then, after they are used 

p.12



MINERALS TO THE SURFACE
CO

Plant roots are one of the main vehicles for CO 2
2

bringing mineral nutrients to the surface soil lay- Nutrient inputs
ers. For a good mineral cycle, we need healthy Uptake
root systems with many of those roots probing Respiration

Carbon
as deeply as possible into the lower layers of soil 
and decomposing rock. It is also important to Decomposition

have a variety of plant species in order to have 
many different root structures and depths. Microorganisms

Organic Matter

In the same way you would recognize plants Calcium Nitrogen

from aboveground by their appearance, you can Weathered Bedrock
also identify them by their wide variety of root 
patterns. Some have abundant surface roots, Image: U.S. Geological Survey
while others reach deep beneath the soil itself 
into rock crevices and cracks, seeking water and plants—is essential to the health of the whole 
nutrients. Having a diversity of plants—a bal- community. Critically important trace minerals 
ance between shallow-rooted and deep-rooted may be beyond the reach of shallow roots.

p.13



COMPONENTS OF  Plant roots are not the only vehicles transporting 
SOIL ORGANIC MATTER nutrients from underground to the soil surface. 

Earthworms, termites and other small insects 
STABILIZED ORGANIC MATTER along with burrowing mammals and other small 

(HUMUS)  animals also play an important role in mineral 
33–50% uplift—bringing the minerals from deep in the 

DECOMPOSING ORGANIC MATTER soil profile to higher in the profile.
(ACTIVE FRACTION)  ABOVEGROUND TO SURFACE

33–50%
Once a plant has obtained nutrients from the soil 

LIVING 
ORGANISMS FRESH RESIDUE (and sometimes the air), plant material—in the form 

<5% <10% of dead leaves, stems, bark, branches, seeds, flowers, 
crop residues, etc.—returns to the soil surface. Sim-
ply returning plant material to the soil surface does 

Components of Soil Organic Matter adapted from The Soil Biology 
Primer, by Elaine R. Ingham, USDA Natural Resource Conservation not make it immediately available for reuse. To be re-
Service https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detailfull/ used, dead material has to be broken down into fine 
soils/health/biology/?cid=nrcs142p2_053868 particles, either by mechanical forces, such as rain, 

Soil organic matter is the storehouse for the wind, hail, or trampling, or through consumption and/
energy and nutrients used by plants and other or decay by surface-feeding insects or large grazing 
organisms. Bacteria, fungi, and other soil dwell- animals that convert the material to dung and urine.
ers transform and release nutrients from organic Sometimes plant material is broken down by fire or 
matter. “Soil organic matter” includes all the or- oxidation. When this happens, many of the nutrients 
ganic substances in or on the soil. take a gaseous form and the residue or ash is blown 
Active fraction organic matter refers to organic or washed away. Soil is also exposed, which can re-
compounds that can be used as food by micro- duce relative moisture, both at the soil surface and 
organisms. The active fraction changes more underground.
quickly than total organic matter in response to Rapid biological decay, rather than slow chemical 
management changes. or physical breakdown, ideally should play the lead 
Humus, or stabilized organic matter, refers to role in the decomposition of annually dying plant 
complex organic compounds that remain after material in environments right across the brittleness 
many organisms have used and transformed the scale, with one major difference. In the less brittle, 
original material. Humus is important in binding perennially moist environments, the soil surface 
tiny soil aggregates, and improves water and typically supports extremely active communities of 
nutrient holding capacity. small organisms throughout most of the year that 

can break down old plant material without any con-
tribution from larger animals. In the more brittle en-
vironments large herbivores hosting vast microor-
ganism populations in their intestinal tracts become 
critical because, over the period of the year when 
50 to 95 percent of the aboveground plant material 
dies, the microorganism and insect populations also 
die down. In such environments, large animals are 
needed either to trample the material down to the 
soil surface, where it will break down more quickly, 

p.14



or to reduce its bulk by grazing and digesting it. The An ideal soil surface is one that is covered with 
gut of the grazing animal is one place that micro- closely-spaced living plants with mature, decaying 
organisms do remain active year-round in brittle plant material (litter) covering the bare ground be-
environments. tween them. The more brittle the environment the 

more likely you will find exposed soil between the 
SURFACE TO UNDERGROUND plants—something you might not see if you do not 
Once plant material has been broken down get down on your hands and knees and look for it. 
through biological activity, fire, or oxidation, how A good covering of litter between the plants (and 
do the critical nutrients move underground? Two on any other bare ground) will hold in moisture 
agents, water and animal life, help them do so and regulate surface temperatures, which make 
naturally. So in planning how to enhance the 
mineral cycle, you will select tools that promote 
water penetration and animal activity.

One word of caution, however: the same wa-
ter that carries nutrients underground can carry 
them down below the root zones of the plants 
you want to encourage. This process, called 
leaching, is often responsible for the loss of 
valuable nutrients. The primary factor that slows 
leaching is organic matter in the soil. The less or-
ganic material provided by dead plants and ani-
mals, and the less biological activity, the greater 
the tendency for leaching to occur. Leaching is 
more common in high rainfall areas where water 
moves through the soil profile in greater quanti- An effective mineral cycle will result in the rapid 

incorporation of dung into the soil by living organisms.
ties.

THE IMPORTANCE  
OF THE SOIL SURFACE
The key to the health of the mineral cycle—as 
with the water cycle—ultimately lies in the con-
dition of the soil surface. An exposed surface, 
capped by the effects of rainfall, is a harsh mi-
croenvironment in which biological breakdown 
occurs very slowly. 

The sealed surface inhibits aeration. As aeration 
decreases, so does the abundance of biologi-
cal life. As the abundance of life decreases, so 
does organic material, which leads to a decrease 
in soil structure. As soil structure decreases, 
so does aeration. As this chain reaction ripples Dung beetle carrying nutrients from the surface underground.

through the ecosystem, fewer plants produce 
less soil cover, increasing the amount of bare, 
nearly impermeable soil.

p.15



the microenvironment much more hospitable to CONCLUSION
decaying microorganisms.

We have now looked at our ecosystem through 
GOOD AND POOR MINERAL CYCLES yet another window—the mineral cycle. As 
In the previous section we looked at effective with the water cycle, part of the future resource 
and noneffective water cycles. What character- base description in your holistic context 
izes an effectively functioning mineral cycle? The should address how the mineral cycle must 
following table will help you to read your land function. Even if you are not a land manager, 
from the perspective of the mineral cycle. It out- well-functioning ecosystem processes are 
lines the characteristics of a good versus a poor important to sustaining the quality of life you 
mineral cycle and lists the indicators to look for desire. 
as you observe what’s happening on your land.

GOOD MINERAL CYCLE POOR MINERAL CYCLE

Soil surface is porous and rich in organic matter Soil surface is sealed or capped,  
and low in organic matter

Surface litter cover is high,  Surface litter cover is low,  
and mature, decaying mulch  and immature, oxidizing litter  

rests on the soil surface rests on the soil surface

Rapid turnover of plant material;  Slow plant material turnover,  
old vegetation breaks down readily and slow breakdown of old vegetation  

(often left standing and weathering)

Large numbers of surface insects  Few surface insects and microorganisms 
and microorganisms present present

Close plant spacing;  Wide plant spacing;  
very little exposed soil large areas of exposed soil

Plant roots are abundant, with  Shallow plant roots,  
good penetration on many levels many lacking deep penetration

Soil underground is also porous  Soil is more compacted  
(good crumb structure), with  (poor crumb structure), with  
abundant underground life reduced underground life

Low surface mineral loss, as  High losses of minerals off surface  
well as mineral loss to leaching as well as losses to leaching

High turnover rate of mineral nutrients Low turnover rate of mineral nutrients

p.16



Community Dynamics SOIL COVER IS KEY
When large amounts of soil are bare and ex-

THE NEVER-ENDING PATTERNS  posed, the community is generally less complex. 
IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF As bare soil is covered with living plants or dead 
BIOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES plant material (litter), biodiversity and community 
From the moment living organisms establish complexity generally increase. When a commu-
themselves in a puddle, on a rock, or on bare nity is in the early stages of development, or is 
or recently disturbed soil, they begin to change reduced from a complex to a simplified commu-
their surroundings. nity of few species, it may be less stable and less 

resilient. Populations of a single unwanted plant, 
Change begets change as the organisms inter- insect or small animal species can boom to high 
act with one another and with their microenvi- numbers. The more complex and diverse com-
ronment—the environment immediately sur- munities become, the fewer the fluctuations in 
rounding them. Eventually a complex commu- numbers within populations of unwanted spe-
nity made up of a great many life forms—from cies, and the more stable communities tend to be.
single-celled microorganisms to large trees and 
mammals—develops, functioning as a whole in One way to gauge a biological community’s 
an apparently stable manner. Once any commu- health is by looking at the diversity of its species, 
nity has reached the highest level of develop- the numbers within populations of those spe-
ment it is capable of, it can appear to remain sta- cies, and the age structure (how many young, 
ble for many years. However, when you examine adults, and mature individuals) within those 
it more closely, you notice the community is al- populations. The greater the species diversity, 
ways in flux. Plants and animals are continually the greater the complexity and the more stable 
dying and being replaced. Varying weather or the community. If you want to protect a certain 
other environmental conditions or competition species, you can create an environment in which 
between species can promote the well-being of it thrives. Likewise, if you want to reduce the 
one species and diminish that of others. Because numbers within a species, you can create an en-
communities remain dynamic at every stage, we vironment that is less than ideal. In either case, 
refer to the process of their never-ending devel- look to the age structure to tell you which direc-
opment as community dynamics. tion you are heading: if there are many young 

of the species in question, that species is likely 
to be increasing; if only mature members can be 
found, that species may be decreasing.

HIGH

THE MORE 
COMPLEX 
AND DIVERSE NUMBERS 
COMMUNITIES WITHIN A 

BECOME, THE POPULATION

MORE STABLE 
POPULATIONS LOW

WITHIN TEND 
TO BE. DIVERSITY OF 

LOW SPECIES HIGH

p.17



NATURE’S WHOLES FUNCTION  compaction, exposure and capping of soil, inad-
AT THE COMMUNITY LEVEL equate drainage, over-fertilization, pesticide poi-
You may recall that one of the key insights lead- soning or other such actions alter the biological 
ing to the development of Holistic Management community belowground. And what happens 
involved the concept of holism—that you can- there will eventually show itself aboveground.
not influence one aspect of an environment or a 
community, without affecting many others. Each CHANGES IN  

BIOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES
individual plant or animal is composed of billions 
of cells, each of which is itself a whole. Individual The development of biological communities – 
plants or animals, in turn, belong not to a whole from bare rock or new pool to mature grassland, 
population, but to a whole community composed forest, or lake –  is a gradual, often staggered, 
of many species. It is important to make this dis- process resulting in greater species diversity and 
tinction because a population of any one species biomass. This relatively orderly process of devel-
cannot exist outside its relationship with millions opment has been given the name succession. 
of other organisms of different species. As succession advances, complexity, productiv-
Some scientists suggest that our whole planet is ity, and stability increase, and the microenviron-
a living organism that modifies the atmosphere ment changes until something limits progress, 
surrounding it through the activity of biological typically climate or some obstruction to further 
communities on land and sea. soil formation (e.g. a subsurface rock layer). Dry 

seasons, harsh winters, limited sunlight, and the 
We know that biological communities include all amount and distribution of precipitation, define 
living organisms—from simple, single-celled or- the kind of community that unhindered succes-
ganisms to large animals, trees and corals. This sion can produce. But whether the end result 
includes the complex web of life that exists with- of this movement is jungle, desert, savannah, 
in soils, where decomposing particles of rock, healthy productive lake, or coral reef, the com-
sand, clay and organic material interact. Many munity is always dynamic as deaths, decay, and 
complex and mutually dependent relationships birth foster ongoing change within it.
exist among all levels—below- and aboveground 
and into the atmosphere. Succession: 
Anything that changes aboveground is likely to The stages through which 
cause even greater changes belowground, sim- biological communities 
ply because there is generally more life under- develop. As simple communities 
ground than above it. For example, a healthy become ever more diverse and 
pasture carrying large numbers of cattle has 
been calculated to carry a population of earth- complex, succession is said to 
worms that alone are double the weight of the be advancing. When complex 
cattle. Likewise, the root structures of plants add communities are reduced to 
to the biomass, as do the tons of microorganisms greater simplicity and less 
that inhabit an acre of healthy soil. It has been es- diversity, succession is set 
timated that as many as a billion microorganisms back. If factors that set it back 
live in a single teaspoon of healthy soil. are removed, succession will 
It’s important to recognize just how much life ex- advance once again
ists beneath the soil surface because excess soil 

p.18



When do certain species thrive, in what num- MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS
bers, and why? Typically, a species will begin All life is successional and dynamic; therefore, 
to appear and its population to increase as its the future resource base described in a holistic 
requirements are met for establishment within context revolves around community dynamics. Our 
the community. Communities are made up of food comes from living organisms and so do most 
numerous populations of species, each of which of our diseases. Our landscapes include living or-
have requirements for survival and will contrib- ganisms. It is critical that we learn to manage living 
ute something to the community. Species pop- organisms taking into account the community as a 
ulations will increase in number as their needs whole, rather than attempting to manage certain or-
are met. But as succession advances, a popu- ganisms in isolation.
lation may begin to decline as its requirements 
for growth and survival shift and are no longer If your holistic context includes financial security and 
optimal and at some point the species may dis- healthy and productive livestock and wildlife, you 
appear entirely. This rise and decline of various most likely will need a landscape that includes pro-
populations is part of the ever-changing dynam- ductive grassland. In a brittle environment, that might 
ic of succession. involve increasing the diversity of perennial grasses. 

In a less brittle environment, that likely means pre-
SUCCESSION AND  venting your pasture land from turning into forest. 
THE BRITTLENESS SCALE In either case, certain plants, insects, predators, and 
In brittle environments, the microenvironment other forms of life may become either allies or foes, 
on exposed soil surfaces is subject to such daily both of which you can increase or decrease through 
and seasonal extremes that the succession pro- managing the successional process.
cess proceeds very slowly. The process is facil- If you want to favor a particular species, then you 
itated on soil covered by old material (litter) and need to direct the successional movement of the 
on ground cracked by weathering or broken by community toward the optimum environment for 
the physical impact of animals or machinery that that species. Simply protecting a species—though it 
‘chips’ the surface. In both cases, a microenvi- may be an important interim step—will not neces-
ronment conducive to adding more complexity sarily save it. 
and diversity, and thus resiliency, usually results. 

This will involve applying management tools that 
Remember, animals can be used deliberately will produce an environment in which that species 
to break up the soil surface and to simultane- thrives. We will cover these tools in detail in ebook 
ously cause plant material to be trampled to the #3.
surface as litter. In most cases in a brittle envi-
ronment, a better microenvironment is achieved If you start with a landscape that has large num-
from animal impact creating this disturbance. In bers of undesirable species, the future landscape 
nonbrittle environments, succession starts with you describe will be one that is less than ideal 
ease from any bare surface. The distribution of for the problem species. Your task will then be 
temperature and humidity promotes the rapid to learn the basic biology of the various species. 
advance of succession nearly anywhere without What stage in the life cycle is the species at its 
the aid of physical disturbance. weakest point? What precise conditions does it 

need to survive at that point? Knowing these an-
swers will help you provide the conditions that 
greatly influence which species will increase in 
numbers and which will decline.

p.19



ENERGY L
OSS A

S H
EAT

ABOVE-GROUND

ENERGY FROM PLANTS

BELOW-GROUND

ENERGY FROM PLANTS

E
A vibrant grassland community with herbivores, people and dogs NER
interacting to create balance and resilience. (Two Dot Ranch, GY LO
Montana, USA) SS AS HEAT

CONCLUSION
You now have a better idea of how biological 
communities function, and in your holistic context 
can better describe what you need: communities 
rich in plant and animal species, or biodiversity, carbon. However, where carbon is constantly 
both above- and belowground. cycling between earth and atmosphere, energy 

from the sun is a one-way flow.
We have explored simply the relationships be-
tween water, soil structure, mineral availability, and If we focus on the energy-carbon connection, 
communities of living organisms. Now we turn to then we miss a key principle for managing the 
the flow of energy that animates all these relation- four ecosystem processes: that the natural living 
ships, the fourth window on the ecosystem. world runs on solar power and our management 

decisions dramatically affect how much is cap-
Energy Flow tured and put to use.

MAXIMIZING THE FLOW  All life on the planet—including humans—de-
OF SUNLIGHT ENERGY  pends on the ability of plants to convert sun-
THROUGH OUR ECOSYSTEM light energy into an edible form. Plants do this 
All organisms require energy to live and the vast through the process of photosynthesis. Of all the 
majority of them depend on the ability of green various ways that power is converted for practi-
plants to capture energy from the sun and convert cal uses (for example photovoltaic, hydroelectric, 
it into a form they can use. Energy flow is simply wind and tidal power for electricity), only pho-
the flow of solar energy through green, growing tosynthesis directly produces food for living or-
plants to all other life, including humans. ganisms.

The energy flow in our ecosystem is often con- THE ENERGY PYRAMID
fused with the carbon cycle, because the stor- The flow of sunlight to food is often depicted as 
age of energy in most living organisms involves an energy pyramid. The figure below shows a 

p.20



T
EA

 H
AS

S 6 DECAY
OS

 L
GY

ER
EN 5 SCAVENGERS/DECAY 

4 FURTHER PREDATORS, INCLUDING HUMANS

3 PREDATORS, INCLUDING HUMANS

2 FISH, BIRDS, INSECTS, REPTILES AND MAMMALS, INCLUDING HUMANS

1 PLANT LIFE ON LAND AND IN WATER

basic energy pyramid. Most of the sunlight that cesses of the feeders. This is no small amount—
strikes the land and water is reflected back im- roughly 90 percent of the energy is lost as heat 
mediately, while some is absorbed as heat to be as you move from one level to the next.
radiated back later. A very small portion of sun-
light energy is converted by green plants into Level 3, the realm of predators, again includ-
food for their own use and that of other organ- ing humans that eat the eaters from Level 1, is 
isms in the food chain. Thus, green plants form smaller still for the same reason.
the base or Level 1 of the energy pyramid. At Level 4, we again find humans and some oth-
On land, all of Level 1 energy conversion is at or er predators dining on fish and the other pred-
above the soil surface, where algae and green ators that fed on Level 2. Again, the living pro-
parts of plants convert the energy. In aquatic en- cesses of the feeders have diminished the bulk 
vironments, what happens is slightly different. of the remaining usable energy by an additional 
Around the shallow edges where plants can still 90 percent.
grow and extend above the water surface, ener- By Level 5, humans drop out of the pyramid. 
gy conversion still occurs as it does on land. But Scavengers and organisms of decay (decom-
over the rest of the area covered by a body of posers) reduce the bulk of stored energy even 
water, energy is also converted by simpler plant further. Beyond Level 5, perhaps another level or 
life far below the surface at depths sunlight can two of decay organisms will use the last remain-
reach. ing useful energy and convert it to heat.
Level 2 represents the energy captured and The energy pyramid is a useful diagram for 
stored by herbivorous animals that eat the plants understanding the principles of how sunlight 
on Level 1—fish, insects, birds and mammals, is converted into forms useful to many living 
including humans. This energy is smaller than organisms. It is not, however, nearly as simple 
the amount expended as heat in the living pro- and tidy as depicted here. At each level, a por-

p.21



tion of the energy passes straight to decay lev- SOIL SURFACE AT 
PLANE A,B,C

el as waste products from animals and through 
microorganisms feeding on plants. In real life, 
due to the high loss of energy at each level, the 
pyramid is probably flatter than shown in the di- A B
agram. However, the concept of ever increasing 
loss of energy at each level holds throughout.

The energy pyramid also extends below ground 
where the energy flow greatly affects the func-
tion of the other three ecosystem processes—
water cycle, mineral cycle and community dy-
namics. All three require a biologically active soil 
community that in turn requires solar energy to 
be conveyed underground by plant roots or sur- DENSITY

face-feeding worms, termites, dung beetles and A B

other organisms.
TIME AREA

THE ENERGY TETRAHEDRON C
The four key insights that led to the development 
of Holistic Management allow us to take this 
two-dimensional picture of energy flow and de- Energy flow seen as two tetrahedrons joined at their bases 
velop a model that allows for a more sophisticat- (labeled A, B, C). We can increase the amount of energy 
ed way of managing energy flow. It’s obvious that stored in the above- and belowground bases (shown in the 
if we can broaden the base (Level 1) of the energy cross section) in three ways by increasing: the time during 
pyramid, we can increase the size of the whole which vegetation can grow and the rate at which it grows; 
structure and have more energy available for use the density of plants on a unit of ground; and the leaf area 
at every level. However, the two-dimensional of individual plants.

model showing energy above and below ground 
indicates very few ways of broadening the base. 3.	 Increasing the leaf area of individual plants to 
When viewed as a three-dimensional model with capture more energy.
two tetrahedrons joined at their bases (labeled A, Clearly, if we extend any of the three sides of the 
B, and C) as illustrated, we now have options for base, the greater the volume of energy humans 
greatly increasing energy flow at the vital first lev- can harvest at levels 2, 3, and 4. On the other 
el where photosynthesis occurs. hand, shortening any single side decreases the 

amount of energy available for harvest all the 
Level 1 now has three sides, which we will refer way up the levels. The same ripple effects hap-
to as time, density, and area. On land, the right pen below ground as above.
management can increase the volume of energy 
stored at Level 1 by doing three things: TIME—DURATION  
1.	 Increasing the time during which the veg- AND RATE OF GROWTH

etation can grow and the rate at which it The energy converted by plants while they are 
can grow. green and growing must support all life above 

2.	 Increasing the density of standing vegetation and below the soil surface throughout the year. 
on a unit of ground. The longer plants are growing, the more produc-

p.22



management and the application of different tools 
could reestablish perennials and restore months of 
productivity to those grasslands.

DENSITY—OF PLANTS
The density side of the base refers to the number 
of plants growing on each square yard or meter of 
land. Ten plants growing on the average square 
yard or meter of ground can probably convert 
more solar energy than three plants in the same 
space. Farmers, ranchers and pastoralists have 
long been aware that plant spacing, or density, 
can greatly affect energy flow on their land and 
have planted accordingly, striving for the opti-

Energy flow is maximized with close plant spacing, large mum density that produces highest yields.
leaf area, and a variety of species that are actively growing at 
different times of the year. In less brittle environments, plant spacing, even 

in relatively pristine environments, is relative-
ly close. This is a function of the climate. Even 

tive the community as a whole. We can increase though management can affect it, plant density is 
the growing time by lengthening the growing naturally high. This is in contrast to the more brit-
season or by increasing the growth rate over a tle environments, where plant density is affected 
given time. In practice, enhancing the mineral by moisture availability and disturbance—or lack 
and water cycles and increasing the complex- of it—from large animals or fire. In these environ-
ity of the biological community will extend the ments, management plays a key role in enhanc-
growing time in both ways (lengthening the ing or diminishing plant density. Here, the use of 
season and increasing growth rates). For exam- animal impact, or technology that simulates ani-
ple, some ranchers have extended their growing mal disturbance, can result in closer plant spac-
seasons from 180 days to 210. ing. However, if incorrectly applied, either one 
In managing grasses, the growing time can also of these tools can result in increased bare spac-
be used more efficiently if the bulk of the grazed es between plants and, as we have seen earlier, 
plants are not grazed down too far. The less bare soil can negatively influence the functioning 
taken from a plant during its active growth, the of all four ecosystem processes.
faster it regrows. AREA—OF LEAF
Growing time is affected by the effectiveness of the Leaf area matters because a very dense stand of 
mineral and water cycles, as well as the complexity narrow-leafed plants may trap less energy than 
and diversity of species in the biological communi- a moderately-dense stand of broader-leafed 
ty. For example in a temperate climate, you might plants. Therefore, if you want to expand the area 
want a mixture of both cool and warm season side of the base, you would have to increase the 
grasses—enough to ensure that you are maximiz- number of broad-leafed plants. 
ing the length of the growing season. Grasslands 
that have been poorly managed often contain Plants adapt themselves in three major ways to 
primarily annual grasses, which convert energy suit different growing conditions. Hydrophytic 
over a shorter time than perennials. A change in (wet-environment) plants thrive in soggy, poor-

ly aerated ground. Mesophytic (middle-envi-

p.23



ronment) plants grow best when air and water more crops per year whenever possible. You may 
are balanced in the soil. Xerophytic (dry-envi- optimize density by planting with close spacings. 
ronment) plants survive where water is scarce, You would strive to maximize the area of leaf that 
though aeration may be good. Both wet and dry is open and exposed to sunlight by creating good 
type plants tend to grow slowly and have nar- drainage, abundant organic matter in the soil and 
row leaves that convert far less energy than the good crumb structure, and by providing adequate 
middle type plants, which spread broad leaves soil cover.
to the sun and grow fast. 

In most grassland situations, we will increase en-
In general, an effective water cycle will result in ergy flow by manipulating the tools of grazing 
more broad-leafed grasses and forbs with fast- and animal impact, with both livestock and wild-
er growth rates. In addition to causing grass life, to produce and maintain maximum grow-
plants to grow more closely together, animal ing time, plant density, and leaf area. Innovative 
disturbance (impact) and severe grazing (versus farmers are also drill-planting a grain crop into 
overgrazing) with adequate recovery periods grazed grasslands, boosting energy flow even 
can cause many species to produce more leaves more through what they call pasture cropping.
and less fiber, which in turn increases the flow of 
available energy to animals and humans. In most forest situations, you would strive to 

maximize energy flow by improving water and 
CONCLUSION mineral cycles and by increasing the diversity of 
In terms of your holistic context, when describ- plant and animal species. This is particularly true 
ing the land in your future resource base, con- in forests that have been simplified through in-
vey what it would look like if energy flow were dustrial-style forestry practices.
high: soil would be covered in vegetation, plants 
would stay green and continue to grow much 
longer than they do now, and there would be a 
variety of them. Wildlife would benefit too and 
be more plentiful as a result. In essence, if the 
water cycle is effective, minerals are cycling rap-
idly, and biodiversity is high, then energy flow 
will tend to be maximized.

Most land managers are looking for and will de-
scribe a situation where the highest energy flow 
is achieved and sustained, whether on crop-
land, rangeland, or forest. In most situations, you 
would strive to manage for an effective water 
and mineral cycle, and for a highly complex bi-
ological community (above- and belowground), 
all of which will result in a high and sustainable 
energy flow.

On croplands, you may seek to maximize the time 
side of the tetrahedron’s base by ensuring good 
daily growth rates and lengthening the season 
through polyculture cropping or at least two or 

p.24



Holistic Management Framework
WHOLE UNDER MANAGEMENT

Decision Makers  —  Resource Base  —  Money

HOLISTIC CONTEXT

(Statement of Purpose)  —  Quality of Life  —  Future Resource Base

ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES

Water Cycle Mineral Cycle Community Dynamics Energy Flow

ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT TOOLS

Living Organisms
Human Creativity Technology Fire Rest • Animal Impact Money & Labor

• Grazing

ACTIONS AND DECISION MAKING

Objectives, Goals, Tactics, Strategies, Policies
Customary Selection Criteria (past experience, expert advice, research, etc.)

CONTEXT CHECKS

Cause & Weak Link Marginal Gross Energy Sustainability Gut Feel
Effect • Social Reaction Profit Money 

• Biological Analysis Source 
• Financial Use

MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES

Time Stock Density Cropping Burning Population 
& Herd Effect Management

PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES FEEDBACK LOOP
Holistic Financial Holistic Land 

Planning Planning PLAN
(ASSUME WRONG) MONITOR

Holistic Planned Holistic Policy 
Grazing Development THE  

FEEDBACK 
LOOP

Holistic Research 
Orientation REPLAN

CONTROL

p.25



GLOSSARY nities from bare soil surfaces unless physically 
disturbed; and (5) algae and lichen covering soil 

ANIMAL IMPACT   The sum total of the direct surfaces for centuries unless adequately dis-
physical influences animals have on the land— turbed. In such environments it is very easy to 
trampling, digging, dunging, urinating, salivating, produce millions of acres where the ground be-
rubbing and so on. Most commonly achieved with tween plants is bare or algae- or lichen-capped, 
herding animals in high concentration. The larger merely by resting the land excessively, burning 
the herd, the greater the effect. it frequently, or overgrazing many grass plants. 

Such areas tend to maintain biodiversity and 
BIODIVERSITY   The diversity of plant and stability only when they receive adequate dis-
animal species and their genetic material and turbance periodically.
the age structure of their populations within a 
given community. CAPPING—IMMATURE   Describes a soil 

surface that has become much thicker than re-
BRITTLENESS SCALE   All terrestrial envi- cent capping through repeated rain events but 
ronments, regardless of total rainfall, fall some- on which there is no sign yet of successional 
where along a continuum from nonbrittle to very movement.
brittle. For simplicity, we refer to this continuum 
as a 10-point scale, 1 being nonbrittle and 10 CAPPING—MATURE   Describes an exposed 
being very brittle. soil surface on which succession has proceeded 

to the level of an algae-, lichen-, or moss-domi-
Completely nonbrittle environments are char- nated community and has stalled at that level. If 
acterized by: (1) reliable precipitation, regard- not adequately disturbed, such communities can 
less of volume; (2) good distribution of humidity remain in that state for centuries, provided the 
throughout the year as a whole; (3) a high rate soil is level enough to inhibit erosion by water.
of biological decay in dead plant material, which 
is most rapid close to the soil surface (thus, dead CAPPING—RECENT  Describes a soil sur-
trees rot at their bases and topple over relatively face that has sealed with the last rainfall and on 
quickly); (4) speedy development of new com- which there is no visible sign yet of succession-
munities on any bare surface; and (5) the de- al movement. Capping is initiated by raindrop 
velopment of complex and stable communities action on an exposed soil. The energy from the 
even where they are not physically disturbed for raindrop breaks crumb structure and frees fine 
many years. In such environments it is virtual- soil particles, which, in turn, seal the surface so 
ly impossible to produce or maintain millions of the soil cannot respire easily. Some people use 
acres where the ground between plants is bare, the term ‘crusting’ instead of ‘capping.’
other than on croplands that are continually ex- COMMUNITY DYNAMICS  The develop-
posed by machinery. ment of communities of living organisms. This 
Very brittle environments, on the other hand, process is ongoing due to the constant interplay 
are characterized by: (1) unreliable precipita- of species, changing composition, and chang-
tion, regardless of volume; (2) poor distribution ing microenvironment. However, the greater the 
of humidity through the year as a whole; (3) the biodiversity within a community, the more com-
chemical (oxidizing) and physical (weathering) plex, and thus the more stable, it tends to be.
breakdown of dead plant material, generally CRUMB STRUCTURE   A soil that has good 
slowly and from the upper parts of plants down- crumb structure is made up largely of aggre-
ward (thus, dead trees remain standing for many gates or crumbs of soil particles held together 
years); (4) very slow development of commu-

p.26



when wet or dry with glue provided by decom- the plant. Overgrazing commonly occurs at three 
posing organic matter. The space around each different times: when the plant is exposed to the 
crumb provides room for water and air, and that, animals for too many days and they are around 
in turn, promotes plant growth. to regraze it as it tries to regrow; when animals 

move away but return too soon and graze the 
ENERGY FLOW  The flow of energy from the plant again while it is still using stored energy 
sun to green growing plants, which convert the to reform leaf; and immediately following dor-
energy (through photosynthesis) to the food that mancy when the plant is growing new leaf from 
fuels all life. Sunlight energy does not cycle, it is stored energy.
a one-way flow through our ecosystem.

OVERRESTED PLANT   This occurs when 
GRAZING—SEVERE   Grazing that removes a perennial grass plant has been rested so long 
a high proportion of the plant’s leaf in either the that accumulating dead material prevents light 
growing or nongrowing season. In the grow- from reaching growth points at the plant’s base, 
ing season this causes a temporary setback hampering new growth and eventually killing 
in the plant’s growth. In the more brittle envi- the plant. Overrest occurs mainly in brittle envi-
ronments, severe grazing at some time during ronments where, in the absence of large herbi-
the year is generally beneficial to most bunched, vores, most old material breaks down gradually 
perennial grass plants and especially those with through oxidation and weathering rather than 
growth points, or buds, at their bases. Most herd- rapidly through biological decay.
ing animals, including cattle, sheep, and goats are 
severe grazers, as are most wild herbivores. PLANT LITTER   Dead plant material—leaves, 

stems, twigs, bark, needles that has fallen or 
HYDROPHYTIC PLANTS  These plants been trampled onto the ground. Plant litter, rath-
have adapted to living in wet environments and er than living plants, provides most of the soil 
can only grow in wetlands or in soils where, cover in brittle environments.
during the growing season, there is an excess of 
water and not enough air. RECOVERY PERIOD—EFFECTIVE  A 

period in which a severely-grazed plant has ac-
MESOPHYTIC PLANTS   These plants grow tually grown new leaves and stems and restored 
best when air and water are in balance in the soil. energy reserves in, depending on the species, 
They generally are broad-leafed and grow fast. reestablished roots, stem bases, or crowns. This 
MINERAL CYCLE   The movement of miner- can occur only under active growing conditions.
al nutrients from soil to plants and animals and SOIL FOOD WEB  Food chains hooked to-
back to the soil again. A healthy and produc- gether into a complex interconnected web.
tive environment will promote the movement of 
minerals from deep soil layers to aboveground SUCCESSION   An important aspect of com-
plants with a minimum of mineral loss from soil munity dynamics, succession describes the 
erosion or mineral leaching. stages through which biological communities 

develop. As simple communities become ever 
OVERGRAZING   This occurs when a plant more diverse and complex, succession is said to 
that has been bitten severely in the growing be advancing. When complex communities are 
season gets bitten severely again while using reduced to greater simplicity and less diversity, 
energy it has taken from its crown, stem bases, succession is set back. If the factors that set it 
or roots to reestablish leaf. Generally, this results back are removed, succession will advance once 
in the eventual death of the plant. In intermedi- again.
ate stages it results in reduced production from 

p.27



WATER CYCLE   The movement of water from 
the atmosphere to the soil (or the oceans) and 
eventually back to the atmosphere. An effective 
water cycle is one in which plants make maxi-
mum use of rainfall, little evaporates directly off 
the soil, and any runoff causes no erosion and 
remains clear. Also a good air-to-water balance 
should exist in the soil, enabling plant roots to 
absorb water readily. For the water cycle to be 
effective in brittle environments, the soil must 
be covered with living plants or litter, as vast 
amounts of water are lost through the bare, ex-
posed soil between plants or to runoff.

XEROPHYTIC PLANTS  From the Greek 
xero, meaning dry. These are plants that have 
adapted to growing in soils where, during the 
growing season, there is an excess of air and lit-
tle water in the soil.

p.28